To Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman. I have seldom heard him mention her under any other name.
In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler.
All emotions, and that one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirably balanced mind.
He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen, but as a lover he would have placed himself in a false position.
He never spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer. They were admirable things for the observer-excellent for drawing the veil from men's motives and actions.
Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his.
And yet there was but one woman to him, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and questionable memory.
Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely shared with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my former friend and companion.
One night-it was on the twentieth of March, 1888-I was returning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civil practice), when my way led me through Baker Street.
His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against the blind.
He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him.
To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their own story. He was at work again.
He had risen out of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in part my own.
"Wedlock suits you," he remarked. "I think, Watson, that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."
Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I fancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe.
I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and careless servant girl?
"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. You would certainly have been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago.
It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as I have changed my clothes I can't imagine how you deduce it.
As to Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but there, again, I fail to see how you work it out.
"It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts.
Obviously they have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it.
Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey.
As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession.
"Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himself down into an armchair. "You see, but you do not observe.
The distinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to this room.
Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is just my point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I have both seen and observed.
By the way, since you are interested in these little problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this.
He threw over a sheet of thick, pink-tinted notepaper which had been lying open upon the table. "It came by the last post," said he.
"There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o'clock," it said, "a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the very deepest moment.
Your recent services to one of the royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.
This account of you we have from all quarters received. Be in your chamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask.
I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorise before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts.
"The man who wrote it was presumably well to do," I remarked, endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes.
"Peculiar-that is the very word," said Holmes. "It is not an English paper at all. Hold it up to the light."
I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and a large "G" with a small "t" woven into the texture of the paper.
Not at all. The 'G' with the small 't' stands for 'Gesellschaft,' which is the German for 'Company.'
It is a customary contraction like our 'Co.' 'P,' of course, stands for 'Papier.' Now for the 'Eg.' Let us glance at our Continental Gazetteer.
He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves. "Eglow, Eglonitz-here we are, Egria. It is in a German-speaking country-in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad.
'Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerous glass-factories and paper-mills.'
Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make of that?" His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette.
Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you note the peculiar construction of the sentence-'This account of you we have from all quarters received.'
A Frenchman or Russian could not have written that. It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs.
It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this German who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask to showing his face.
As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and grating wheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the bell.
"A pair, by the sound," said he. "Yes," he continued, glancing out of the window. "A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties.
Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am lost without my Boswell. And this promises to be interesting.
Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he comes. Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention.
A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and in the passage, paused immediately outside the door.
A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six inches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules.
Boots which extended halfway up his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with rich brown fur, completed the impression of barbaric opulence which was suggested by his whole appearance.
From the lower part of the face he appeared to be a man of strong character, with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin suggestive of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.
"You had my note?" he asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly marked German accent. "I told you that I would call."
"Pray take a seat," said Holmes. "This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases.
I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back into my chair. "It is both, or none," said he.
The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. "Then I must begin," said he, "by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the end of that time the matter will be of no importance.
At present it is not too much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence upon European history.
"You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor. "The august person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you, and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just called myself is not exactly my own."
The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has to be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal and seriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe.
"I was also aware of that," murmured Holmes, settling himself down in his armchair and closing his eyes.
Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid, lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him as the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe.
"If your Majesty would condescend to state your case," he remarked, "I should be better able to advise you."
The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in uncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground.
"Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes. "Your Majesty had not spoken before I was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King of Bohemia."
Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it to an agent without putting myself in his power.
The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known adventuress, Irene Adler.
In this case I found her biography sandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander who had written a monograph upon the deep-sea fishes.
"Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858. Contralto-hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw-yes!
Retired from operatic stage-ha! Living in London-quite so! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled with this young person, wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous of getting those letters back.
Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person should produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she to prove their authenticity?
Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her house. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled.
To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the King of Scandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family.
She is herself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my conduct would bring the matter to an end.
Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I know that she will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel.
She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind of the most resolute of men. Rather than I should marry another woman, there are no lengths to which she would not go-none.
Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the betrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday.
"Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn. "That is very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look into just at present.
"Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have some good news for you. And good-night, Watson," he added, as the wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street.
If you will be good enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three o'clock I should like to chat this little matter over with you.
At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not yet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the house shortly after eight o'clock in the morning.
So accustomed was I to his invariable success that the very possibility of his failing had ceased to enter into my head.
It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room.
Accustomed as I was to my friend's amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it was indeed he.
With a nod he vanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old.
Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes.
"Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked and laughed again until he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair.
It's quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I employed my morning, or what I ended by doing.
I can't imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits, and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler.
I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that there was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden.
I lent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and received in exchange twopence, a glass of half-and-half, two fills of shag tobacco, and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler, to say nothing of half a dozen other people in the neighbourhood in whom I was not in the least interested, but whose biographies I was compelled to listen to.
This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the matter. He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous.
What was the relation between them, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client, his friend, or his mistress?
If the former, she had probably transferred the photograph to his keeping. If the latter, it was less likely.
On the issue of this question depended whether I should continue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to the gentleman's chambers in the Temple.
It was a delicate point, and it widened the field of my inquiry. I fear that I bore you with these details, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you are to understand the situation.
It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentleman thanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the clergyman beamed on me in front.
It was the most preposterous position in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the thought of it that started me laughing just now.
Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if the pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate very prompt and energetic measures on my part.
At the church door, however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to her own house.
'I shall drive out in the park at five as usual,' she said as she left him. I heard no more. They drove away in different directions, and I went off to make my own arrangements.
"Some cold beef and a glass of beer," he answered, ringing the bell. "I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier still this evening.
It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the scene of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive at seven.
You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to occur. There is only one point on which I must insist.
To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some small unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyed into the house.
Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-room window will open. You are to station yourself close to that open window.
And when I raise my hand-so-you will throw into the room what I give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire.
"It is nothing very formidable," he said, taking a long cigar-shaped roll from his pocket. "It is an ordinary plumber's smoke-rocket, fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting.
Your task is confined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be taken up by quite a number of people.
You may then walk to the end of the street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I have made myself clear?
I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and at the signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire, and to wait you at the corner of the street.
That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I prepare for the new role I have to play.
He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in the character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman.
His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his sympathetic smile, and general look of peering and benevolent curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled.
It was not merely that Holmes changed his costume. His expression, his manner, his very soul seemed to vary with every fresh part that he assumed.
The stage lost a fine actor, even as science lost an acute reasoner, when he became a specialist in crime.
It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in Serpentine Avenue.
It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the coming of its occupant.
The house was just such as I had pictured it from Sherlock Holmes' succinct description, but the locality appeared to be less private than I expected.
On the contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated. There was a group of shabbily dressed men smoking and laughing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a nurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging up and down with cigars in their mouths.
"You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of the house, "this marriage rather simplifies matters.
The photograph becomes a double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be as averse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is to its coming to the eyes of his princess.
It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It is cabinet size. Too large for easy concealment about a woman's dress.
She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid and searched. Two attempts of the sort have already been made.
Her banker or her lawyer. There is that double possibility. But I am inclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive, and they like to do their own secreting.
Why should she hand it over to anyone else? She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tell what indirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon a business man.
Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it within a few days. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it.
She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is her carriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter.
As he spoke the gleam of the sidelights of a carriage came round the curve of the avenue. It was a smart little landau which rattled up to the door of Briony Lodge.
A fierce quarrel broke out, which was increased by the two guardsmen, who took sides with one of the loungers, and by the scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the other side.
Holmes dashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but, just as he reached her, he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood running freely down his face.
Irene Adler, as I will still call her, had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with her superb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking back into the street.
"No, no, there's life in him!" shouted another. "But he'll be gone before you can get him to hospital."
"He's a brave fellow," said a woman. "They would have had the lady's purse and watch if it hadn't been for him.
Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out in the principal room, while I still observed the proceedings from my post by the window.
The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had not been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch.
And yet it would be the blackest treachery to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrusted to me.
I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from under my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring her.
Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man who is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window.
At the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossed my rocket into the room with a cry of "Fire!"
The word was no sooner out of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed and ill-gentlemen, ostlers, and servant maids-joined in a general shriek of "Fire!"
Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar.
He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we had turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the Edgeware Road.
"I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing. "The matter was perfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the street was an accomplice.
Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the palm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to my face, and became a piteous spectacle.
Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else could she do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very room which I suspected.
It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was determined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air, they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance.
It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire, her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most.
She would rush to secure it. The alarm of fire was admirably done. The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves of steel.
She responded beautifully. The photograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above the right bell-pull.
Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the King to-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us.
We will be shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph.
At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have a clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean a complete change in her life and habits.
We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He was searching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:
There were several people on the pavement at the time, but the greeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had hurried by.
"I've heard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down the dimly lit street. "Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been."
I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our toast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed into the room.
"You have really got it!" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by either shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.
Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. If the lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty.
If she does not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should interfere with your Majesty's plan.
It is true. And yet-! Well! I wish she had been of my own station! What a queen she would have made!
The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood upon the steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from the brougham.
"I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looking at her with a questioning and rather startled gaze.
Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She left this morning with her husband by the 5:15 train from Charing Cross for the Continent.
"What!" Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and surprise. "Do you mean that she has left England?"
"We shall see." He pushed past the servant and rushed into the drawing-room, followed by the King and myself.
The furniture was scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her flight.
Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a letter.
The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress, the letter was superscribed to "Sherlock Holmes, Esq.
To be left till called for." My friend tore it open, and we all three read it together. It was dated at midnight of the preceding night and ran in this way:
"What a woman-oh, what a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when we had all three read this epistle. "Did I not tell you how quick and resolute she was?
"From what I have seen of the lady, she seems, indeed, to be on a very different level to your Majesty," said Holmes coldly.
I am sorry that I have not been able to bring your Majesty's business to a more successful conclusion.
"On the contrary, my dear sir," cried the King; "nothing could be more successful. I know that her word is inviolate.
"I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can reward you. This ring-" He slipped an emerald snake ring from his finger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.
I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the matter. I have the honour to wish you a very good morning.
He bowed, and, turning away without observing the hand which the King had stretched out to him, he set off in my company for his chambers.
And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom of Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten by a woman's wit.
He used to make merry over the cleverness of women, but I have not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks of Irene Adler, or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under the honourable title of the woman.
I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with a very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair.
With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes pulled me abruptly into the room and closed the door behind me.
Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he will be of the utmost use to me in yours also.
The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob of greeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his small fat-encircled eyes.
"Try the settee," said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and putting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in judicial moods.
I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday life.
You have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventures.
You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we went into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, that for strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to life itself, which is always far more daring than any effort of the imagination.
You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view, for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right.
Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning, and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singular which I have listened to for some time.
As a rule, when I have heard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to my memory.
The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of some little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the inside pocket of his greatcoat.
As he glanced down the advertisement column, with his head thrust forward and the paper flattened out upon his knee, I took a good look at the man and endeavoured, after the fashion of my companion, to read the indications which might be presented by his dress or appearance.
I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore every mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow.
A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him.
Altogether, look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man save his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin and discontent upon his features.
Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook his head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances.
Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some time done manual labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, and that he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce nothing else.
Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger upon the paper, but his eyes upon my companion.
"How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?" he asked. "How did you know, for example, that I did manual labour.
Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger than your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more developed.
I won't insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that, especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you use an arc-and-compass breastpin.
What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for five inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow where you rest it upon the desk?
The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wrist could only have been done in China.
I have made a small study of tattoo marks and have even contributed to the literature of the subject.
That trick of staining the fishes' scales of a delicate pink is quite peculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging from your watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple.
Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. "Well, I never!" said he. "I thought at first that you had done something clever, but I see that there was nothing in it after all."
"Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red finger planted halfway down the column. "Here it is.
All red-headed men who are sound in body and mind and above the age of twenty-one years, are eligible.
Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o'clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope's Court, Fleet Street.
"What on earth does this mean?" I ejaculated after I had twice read over the extraordinary announcement.
Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in high spirits. "It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?"
"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a small pawnbroker's business at Coburg Square, near the City.
It's not a very large affair, and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come for half wages so as to learn the business.
I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement.
Every shade of colour they were-straw, lemon, orange, brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there were not many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint.
When I saw how many were waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding would not hear of it.
How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed and pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right up to the steps which led to the office.
There was a double stream upon the stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the office.
"Your experience has been a most entertaining one," remarked Holmes as his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch of snuff.
Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots and Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with diligence that I might get on to the B's before very long.
It cost me something in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my writings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end.
He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet of note-paper. It read in this fashion:
Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the rueful face behind it, until the comical side of the affair so completely overtopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a roar of laughter.
"I cannot see that there is anything very funny," cried our client, flushing up to the roots of his flaming head.
"No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which he had half risen. "I really wouldn't miss your case for the world.
It is most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it.
I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard of either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross.
I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of my assistant. But he could not help me in any way.
He could only say that if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough, Mr. Holmes.
I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice to poor folk who were in need of it, I came right away to you.
"And you did very wisely," said Holmes. "Your case is an exceedingly remarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it.
From what you have told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang from it than might at first sight appear.
"As far as you are personally concerned," remarked Holmes, "I do not see that you have any grievance against this extraordinary league.
On the contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some £ 30, to say nothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subject which comes under the letter A.
No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and what their object was in playing this prank-if it was a prank-upon me.
We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And, first, one or two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first called your attention to the advertisement-how long had he been with you?
Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face, though he's not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon his forehead.
Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought as much," said he. "Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced for earrings?"
That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion upon the subject in the course of a day or two.
"To smoke," he answered. "It is quite a three pipe problem, and I beg that you won't speak to me for fifty minutes."
He curled himself up in his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, and there he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrusting out like the bill of some strange bird.
I had come to the conclusion that he had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly sprang out of his chair with the gesture of a man who has made up his mind and put his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.
"Sarasate plays at the St. James's Hall this afternoon," he remarked. "What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a few hours?"
Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first, and we can have some lunch on the way.
I observe that there is a good deal of German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste than Italian or French.
We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short walk took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular story which we had listened to in the morning.
Three gilt balls and a brown board with "JABEZ WILSON" in white letters, upon a corner house, announced the place where our red-headed client carried on his business.
Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on one side and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly between puckered lids.
Then he walked slowly up the street, and then down again to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses.
Finally he returned to the pawnbroker's, and, having thumped vigorously upon the pavement with his stick two or three times, he went up to the door and knocked.
"Smart fellow, that," observed Holmes as we walked away. "He is, in my judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I am not sure that he has not a claim to be third.
"Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts for a good deal in this mystery of the Red-headed League.
My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We are spies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.
The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to it as the front of a picture does to the back.
It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately business premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant square which we had just quitted.
"Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing along the line, "I should like just to remember the order of the houses here.
That carries us right on to the other block. And now, Doctor, we've done our work, so it's time we had some play.
A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are no red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums.
My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit.
When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St. James's Hall I felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set himself to hunt down.
And I have some business to do which will take some hours. This business at Coburg Square is serious.
A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason to believe that we shall be in time to stop it.
Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger, so kindly put your army revolver in your pocket.
I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was always oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with Sherlock Holmes.
What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed? Where were we going, and what were we to do?
I had the hint from Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbroker's assistant was a formidable man-a man who might play a deep game.
I tried to puzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matter aside until night should bring an explanation.
It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my way across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street.
Two hansoms were standing at the door, and as I entered the passage I heard the sound of voices from above.
On entering his room, I found Holmes in animated conversation with two men, one of whom I recognised as Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat.
"Ha! Our party is complete," said Holmes, buttoning up his pea-jacket and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack.
Watson, I think you know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr. Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night's adventure.
"We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see," said Jones in his consequential way. "Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a chase.
It is not too much to say that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the official force.
"Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right," said the stranger with deference. "Still, I confess that I miss my rubber.
"I think you will find," said Sherlock Holmes, "that you will play for a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the play will be more exciting.
For you, Mr. Merryweather, the stake will be some £ 30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you wish to lay your hands.
He's a remarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford.
His brain is as cunning as his fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never know where to find the man himself.
He'll crack a crib in Scotland one week, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next.
I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night. I've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with you that he is at the head of his profession.
It is past ten, however, and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom, Watson and I will follow in the second.
Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive and lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in the afternoon.
"We are close there now," my friend remarked. "This fellow Merryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in the matter.
I thought it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession.
He has one positive virtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobster if he gets his claws upon anyone.
Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was opened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate.
Mr. Merryweather stopped to light a lantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage, and so, after opening a third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which was piled all round with crates and massive boxes.
"You are not very vulnerable from above," Holmes remarked as he held up the lantern and gazed about him.
"Nor from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon the flags which lined the floor. "Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!"
"I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!" said Holmes severely. "You have already imperilled the whole success of our expedition.
Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit down upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?
A few seconds sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again and put his glass in his pocket.
"We have at least an hour before us," he remarked, "for they can hardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed.
Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work the longer time they will have for their escape.
We are at present, Doctor-as no doubt you have divined-in the cellar of the City branch of one of the principal London banks.
Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of directors, and he will explain to you that there are reasons why the more daring criminals of London should take a considerable interest in this cellar at present.
"It is our French gold," whispered the director. "We have had several warnings that an attempt might be made upon it."
Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources and borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France.
It has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack the money, and that it is still lying in our cellar.
The crate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil. Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually kept in a single branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon the subject.
"Which were very well justified," observed Holmes. "And now it is time that we arranged our little plans.
I expect that within an hour matters will come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern.
But I see that the enemy's preparations have gone so far that we cannot risk the presence of a light.
And, first of all, we must choose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall take them at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are careful.
I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly.
The smell of hot metal remained to assure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at a moment's notice.
To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of the vault.
"They have but one retreat," whispered Holmes. "That is back through the house into Saxe-Coburg Square.
What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but an hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must have almost gone, and the dawn be breaking above us.
From my position I could look over the case in the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caught the glint of a light.
For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing fingers, protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark which marked a chink between the stones.
In another instant he stood at the side of the hole and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small like himself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.
"It's all clear," he whispered. "Have you the chisel and the bags? Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I'll swing for it!"
Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar. The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rending cloth as Jones clutched at his skirts.
The light flashed upon the barrel of a revolver, but Holmes' hunting crop came down on the man's wrist, and the pistol clinked upon the stone floor.
"So I see," the other answered with the utmost coolness. "I fancy that my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails."
"You'll see your pal again presently," said Jones. "He's quicker at climbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derbies."
"I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands," remarked our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists.
You may not be aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also, when you address me always to say 'sir' and 'please.'
"All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would you please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry your Highness to the police-station?"
"That is better," said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow to the three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of the detective.
"Really, Mr. Holmes," said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them from the cellar, "I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you.
There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the most complete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank robbery that have ever come within my experience.
"I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr. John Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense over this matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I am amply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways unique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League."
It was a curious way of managing it, but, really, it would be difficult to suggest a better. The method was no doubt suggested to Clay's ingenious mind by the colour of his accomplice's hair.
The £ 4 a week was a lure which must draw him, and what was it to them, who were playing for thousands?
They put in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporary office, the other rogue incites the man to apply for it, and together they manage to secure his absence every morning in the week.
From the time that I heard of the assistant having come for half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive for securing the situation.
So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick.
I was ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. It was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistant answered it.
We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face.
His knees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were.
When you drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have seen.
Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that they cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence-in other words, that they had completed their tunnel.
But it was essential that they should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might be removed.
Saturday would suit them better than any other day, as it would give them two days for their escape. For all these reasons I expected them to come to-night.
"You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeigned admiration. "It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true."
"It saved me from ennui," he answered, yawning. "Alas! I already feel it closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escape from the commonplaces of existence.
"My dear fellow," said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side of the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, "life is infinitely stranger than anything which the mind of man could invent.
"And yet I am not convinced of it," I answered. "The cases which come to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough.
We have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither fascinating nor artistic.
But here"-I picked up the morning paper from the ground-"let us put it to a practical test. Here is the first heading upon which I come.
'A husband's cruelty to his wife.' There is half a column of print, but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me.
There is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady.
"Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument," said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it.
This is the Dundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in clearing up some small points in connection with it.
He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the centre of the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon it.
"Ah," said he, "I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers."
It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in which I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my little problems.
Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest. They are important, you understand, without being interesting.
Indeed, I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that there is a field for the observation, and for the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives the charm to an investigation.
The larger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime the more obvious, as a rule, is the motive.
In these cases, save for one rather intricate matter which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothing which presents any features of interest.
It is possible, however, that I may have something better before very many minutes are over, for this is one of my clients, or I am much mistaken.
He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street.
From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her glove buttons.
Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp clang of the bell.
She would like advice, but is not sure that the matter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we may discriminate.
When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire.
Here we may take it that there is a love matter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved.
Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.
"Do you not find," he said, "that with your short sight it is a little trying to do so much typewriting?"
"Never mind," said Holmes, laughing; "it is my business to know things. Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook.
I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whose husband you found so easy when the police and everyone had given him up for dead.
Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I'm not rich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besides the little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel.
"Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?" asked Sherlock Holmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to the ceiling.
He would not go to the police, and he would not go to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on saying that there was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just on with my things and came right away to you.
Yes, my stepfather. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too, for he is only five years and two months older than myself.
Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn't best pleased, Mr. Holmes, when she married again so soon after father's death, and a man who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself.
They got £ 4700 for the goodwill and interest, which wasn't near as much as father could have got if he had been alive.
I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this rambling and inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he had listened with the greatest concentration of attention.
"You interest me extremely," said Holmes. "And since you draw so large a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain, you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself in every way.
Of course, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draws my interest every quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can do pretty well with what I earn at typewriting.
"You have made your position very clear to me," said Holmes. "This is my friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before myself.
A flush stole over Miss Sutherland's face, and she picked nervously at the fringe of her jacket. "I met him first at the gasfitters' ball," she said.
They used to send father tickets when he was alive, and then afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother.
Mr. Windibank did not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere. He would get quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat.
But this time I was set on going, and I would go; for what right had he to prevent? He said the folk were not fit for us to know, when all father's friends were to be there.
And he said that I had nothing fit to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as taken out of the drawer.
At last, when nothing else would do, he went off to France upon the business of the firm, but we went, mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel.
"I suppose," said Holmes, "that when Mr. Windibank came back from France he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball."
Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, and shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to a woman, for she would have her way.
Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if we had got home all safe, and after that we met him-that is to say, Mr. Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came back again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any more.
Well, you know father didn't like anything of the sort. He wouldn't have any visitors if he could help it, and he used to say that a woman should be happy in her own family circle.
But then, as I used to say to mother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and I had not got mine yet.
Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmer wrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see each other until he had gone.
We could write in the meantime, and he used to write every day. I took the letters in in the morning, so there was no need for father to know.
Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after the first walk that we took. Hosmer-Mr. Angel-was a cashier in an office in Leadenhall Street-and-
That will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little things that he would think of.
"It was most suggestive," said Holmes. "It has long been an axiom of mine that the little things are infinitely the most important.
He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me in the evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to be conspicuous.
He was always well dressed, very neat and plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore tinted glasses against the glare.
Mother said he was quite right to make me swear, and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother was all in his favour from the first and was even fonder of him than I was.
I didn't quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should ask his leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but I didn't want to do anything on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where the company has its French offices, but the letter came back to me on the very morning of the wedding.
Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour's, near King's Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St. Pancras Hotel.
Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler, which happened to be the only other cab in the street.
We got to the church first, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to step out, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box and looked there was no one there!
The cabman said that he could not imagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with his own eyes.
That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heard anything since then to throw any light upon what became of him.
Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that some unforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?
Yes, sir. I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he would not have talked so. And then I think that what he foresaw happened.
Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened, and that I should hear of Hosmer again.
As he said, what interest could anyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leaving me?
And yet, what could have happened? And why could he not write? Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can't sleep a wink at night.
"I shall glance into the case for you," said Holmes, rising, "and I have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result.
Let the weight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwell upon it further. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish from your memory, as he has done from your life.
You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an accurate description of him and any letters of his which you can spare.
"I advertised for him in last Saturday's _Chronicle_," said she. "Here is the slip and here are four letters from him."
Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will leave the papers here, and remember the advice which I have given you.
You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be true to Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back.
For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelled our respect.
She laid her little bundle of papers upon the table and went her way, with a promise to come again whenever she might be summoned.
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips still pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, and his gaze directed upward to the ceiling.
Then he took down from the rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor, and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor in his face.
"Quite an interesting study, that maiden," he observed. "I found her more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, is rather a trite one.
You will find parallel cases, if you consult my index, in Andover in '77, and there was something of the sort at The Hague last year.
Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two details which were new to me. But the maiden herself was most instructive.
Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look, and so you missed all that was important.
I can never bring you to realise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails, or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace.
Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a feather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments.
Her dress was brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a little purple plush at the neck and sleeves.
Her gloves were greyish and were worn through at the right forefinger. Her boots I didn't observe. She had small round, hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being fairly well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way.
Never trust to general impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is always at a woman's sleeve.
In a man it is perhaps better first to take the knee of the trouser. As you observe, this woman had plush upon her sleeves, which is a most useful material for showing traces.
The double line a little above the wrist, where the typewritist presses against the table, was beautifully defined.
The sewing-machine, of the hand type, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the side of it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right across the broadest part, as this was.
I then glanced at her face, and, observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ventured a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed to surprise her.
One was buttoned only in the two lower buttons out of five, and the other at the first, third, and fifth.
Now, when you see that a young lady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away in a hurry.
She had written in a hurry and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, or the mark would not remain clear upon the finger.
All this is amusing, though rather elementary, but I must go back to business, Watson. Would you mind reading me the advertised description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?
I held the little printed slip to the light. "Missing," it said, "on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel.
Was dressed, when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert chain, and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots.
"That will do," said Holmes. "As to the letters," he continued, glancing over them, "they are very commonplace.
Absolutely no clue in them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is one remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you.
Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look at the neat little 'Hosmer Angel' at the bottom.
There is a date, you see, but no superscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. The point about the signature is very suggestive-in fact, we may call it conclusive.
I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be able to deny his signature if an action for breach of promise were instituted.
It is just as well that we should do business with the male relatives. And now, Doctor, we can do nothing until the answers to those letters come, so we may put our little problem upon the shelf for the interim.
Once only had I known him to fail, in the case of the King of Bohemia and of the Irene Adler photograph; but when I looked back to the weird business of the Sign of Four, and the extraordinary circumstances connected with the Study in Scarlet, I felt that it would be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.
I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with the conviction that when I came again on the next evening I would find that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to the identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherland.
A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention at the time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of the sufferer.
I found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half asleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses of his armchair.
A formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, with the pungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent his day in the chemical work which was so dear to him.
Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. There was never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday, some of the details are of interest.
The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet opened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the passage and a tap at the door.
"This is the girl's stepfather, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes. "He has written to me to say that he would be here at six.
He shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed his shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled down into the nearest chair.
"Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes. "I think that this typewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment with me for six o'clock?"
It was quite against my wishes that she came, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may have noticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up her mind on a point.
Of course, I did not mind you so much, as you are not connected with the official police, but it is not pleasant to have a family misfortune like this noised abroad.
"On the contrary," said Holmes quietly; "I have every reason to believe that I will succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"It is a curious thing," remarked Holmes, "that a typewriter has really quite as much individuality as a man's handwriting.
Unless they are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some letters get more worn than others, and some wear only on one side.
Now, you remark in this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case there is some little slurring over of the 'e,' and a slight defect in the tail of the 'r.'
"We do all our correspondence with this machine at the office, and no doubt it is a little worn," our visitor answered, glancing keenly at Holmes with his bright little eyes.
It is a subject to which I have devoted some little attention. I have here four letters which purport to come from the missing man.
They are all typewritten. In each case, not only are the 'e's' slurred and the 'r's' tailless, but you will observe, if you care to use my magnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics to which I have alluded are there as well.
Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. "I cannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes," he said.
"Certainly," said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in the door. "I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"
"What! where?" shouted Mr. Windibank, turning white to his lips and glancing about him like a rat in a trap.
"Oh, it won't do-really it won't," said Holmes suavely. "There is no possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank.
It is quite too transparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you said that it was impossible for me to solve so simple a question.
Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glitter of moisture on his brow. "It-it's not actionable," he stammered.
I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves, Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a petty way as ever came before me.
The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his breast, like one who is utterly crushed.
Holmes stuck his feet up on the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands in his pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed, than to us.
"The man married a woman very much older than himself for her money," said he, "and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as long as she lived with them.
It was a considerable sum, for people in their position, and the loss of it would have made a serious difference.
Now her marriage would mean, of course, the loss of a hundred a year, so what does her stepfather do to prevent it?
He takes the obvious course of keeping her at home and forbidding her to seek the company of people of her own age.
But soon he found that that would not answer forever. She became restive, insisted upon her rights, and finally announced her positive intention of going to a certain ball.
What does her clever stepfather do then? He conceives an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart.
With the connivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the girl's short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off other lovers by making love himself.
"It was only a joke at first," groaned our visitor. "We never thought that she would have been so carried away."
She was flattered by the gentleman's attentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressed admiration of her mother.
Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it was obvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if a real effect were to be produced.
There were meetings, and an engagement, which would finally secure the girl's affections from turning towards anyone else.
But the deception could not be kept up forever. These pretended journeys to France were rather cumbrous.
Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a Testament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of something happening on the very morning of the wedding.
James Windibank wished Miss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as to his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not listen to another man.
As far as the church door he brought her, and then, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the old trick of stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the other.
Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmes had been talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer upon his pale face.
"It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but if you are so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who are breaking the law now, and not me.
I have done nothing actionable from the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint.
"The law cannot, as you say, touch you," said Holmes, unlocking and throwing open the door, "yet there never was a man who deserved punishment more.
If the young lady has a brother or a friend, he ought to lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!" he continued, flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon the man's face, "it is not part of my duties to my client, but here's a hunting crop handy, and I think I shall just treat myself to-" He took two swift steps to the whip, but before he could grasp it there was a wild clatter of steps upon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, and from the window we could see Mr. James Windibank running at the top of his speed down the road.
"There's a cold-blooded scoundrel!" said Holmes, laughing, as he threw himself down into his chair once more.
That fellow will rise from crime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest.
Then the fact that the two men were never together, but that the one always appeared when the other was away, was suggestive.
So were the tinted spectacles and the curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers.
Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. I knew the firm for which this man worked.
I had already noticed the peculiarities of the typewriter, and I wrote to the man himself at his business address asking him if he would come here.
If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the old Persian saying, 'There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub, and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.'
We were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when the maid brought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes and ran in this way:
Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for from the west of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy.
Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you. You have been looking a little pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, and you are always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes' cases.
"I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained through one of them," I answered. "But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for I have only half an hour."
My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effect of making me a prompt and ready traveller.
My wants were few and simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a cab with my valise, rattling away to Paddington Station.
Sherlock Holmes was pacing up and down the platform, his tall, gaunt figure made even gaunter and taller by his long grey travelling-cloak and close-fitting cloth cap.
"It is really very good of you to come, Watson," said he. "It makes a considerable difference to me, having someone with me on whom I can thoroughly rely.
Local aid is always either worthless or else biassed. If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the tickets.
We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of papers which Holmes had brought with him.
Among these he rummaged and read, with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, until we were past Reading.
The London press has not had very full accounts. I have just been looking through all the recent papers in order to master the particulars.
But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a clue. The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more difficult it is to bring it home.
In this case, however, they have established a very serious case against the son of the murdered man.
The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder, the game-keeper, lost sight of them.
She states that while she was there she saw, at the border of the wood and close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son, and that they appeared to be having a violent quarrel.
She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder using very strong language to his son, and she saw the latter raise up his hand as if to strike his father.
She had hardly said the words when young Mr. McCarthy came running up to the lodge to say that he had found his father dead in the wood, and to ask for the help of the lodge-keeper.
He was much excited, without either his gun or his hat, and his right hand and sleeve were observed to be stained with fresh blood.
On following him they found the dead body stretched out upon the grass beside the pool. The head had been beaten in by repeated blows of some heavy and blunt weapon.
The injuries were such as might very well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his son's gun, which was found lying on the grass within a few paces of the body.
"I could hardly imagine a more damning case," I remarked. "If ever circumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so here."
It must be confessed, however, that the case looks exceedingly grave against the young man, and it is very possible that he is indeed the culprit.
Lestrade, being rather puzzled, has referred the case to me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gentlemen are flying westward at fifty miles an hour instead of quietly digesting their breakfasts at home.
"I am afraid," said I, "that the facts are so obvious that you will find little credit to be gained out of this case."
"There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact," he answered, laughing. "Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other obvious facts which may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade.
You know me too well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shall either confirm or destroy his theory by means which he is quite incapable of employing, or even of understanding.
To take the first example to hand, I very clearly perceive that in your bedroom the window is upon the right-hand side, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would have noted even so self-evident a thing as that.
I could not imagine a man of your habits looking at himself in an equal light and being satisfied with such a result.
There are one or two minor points which were brought out in the inquest, and which are worth considering.
This observation of his had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which might have remained in the minds of the coroner's jury.
His frank acceptance of the situation marks him as either an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraint and firmness.
The self-reproach and contrition which are displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of a healthy mind rather than of a guilty one.
It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters, though there are one or two points in it which are suggestive.
"I see," said I as I glanced down the column, "that the coroner in his concluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy.
No, sir, I shall approach this case from the point of view that what this young man says is true, and we shall see whither that hypothesis will lead us.
And now here is my pocket Petrarch, and not another word shall I say of this case until we are on the scene of action.
It was nearly four o'clock when we at last, after passing through the beautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn, found ourselves at the pretty little country-town of Ross.
"I have ordered a carriage," said Lestrade as we sat over a cup of tea. "I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not be happy until you had been on the scene of the crime."
"It was very nice and complimentary of you," Holmes answered. "It is entirely a question of barometric pressure."
Lestrade laughed indulgently. "You have, no doubt, already formed your conclusions from the newspapers," he said.
The case is as plain as a pikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer it becomes. Still, of course, one can't refuse a lady, and such a very positive one, too.
She has heard of you, and would have your opinion, though I repeatedly told her that there was nothing which you could do which I had not already done.
He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the most lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life.
Her violet eyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all thought of her natural reserve lost in her overpowering excitement and concern.
"Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" she cried, glancing from one to the other of us, and finally, with a woman's quick intuition, fastening upon my companion, "I am so glad that you have come.
I have driven down to tell you so. I know that James didn't do it. I know it, and I want you to start upon your work knowing it, too.
Never let yourself doubt upon that point. We have known each other since we were little children, and I know his faults as no one else does; but he is too tender-hearted to hurt a fly.
"I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner," said Sherlock Holmes. "You may rely upon my doing all that I can."
But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Do you not see some loophole, some flaw?
"There, now!" she cried, throwing back her head and looking defiantly at Lestrade. "You hear! He gives me hopes."
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am afraid that my colleague has been a little quick in forming his conclusions," he said.
But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it. And about his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason why he would not speak about it to the coroner was because I was concerned in it.
It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had many disagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there should be a marriage between us.
James and I have always loved each other as brother and sister; but of course he is young and has seen very little of life yet, and-and-well, he naturally did not wish to do anything like that yet.
"No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favour of it." A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot one of his keen, questioning glances at her.
Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for years back, but this has broken him down completely.
He has taken to his bed, and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nervous system is shattered.
You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt you will go to the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him that I know him to be innocent.
I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if I leave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking.
She hurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we heard the wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.
"I am ashamed of you, Holmes," said Lestrade with dignity after a few minutes' silence. "Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound to disappoint?
"I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy," said Holmes. "Have you an order to see him in prison?"
Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have still time to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?
Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very slow, but I shall only be away a couple of hours.
It was something terrible and deadly. What could it be? Might not the nature of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts?
I rang the bell and called for the weekly county paper, which contained a verbatim account of the inquest.
In the surgeon's deposition it was stated that the posterior third of the left parietal bone and the left half of the occipital bone had been shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon.
Still, it did not go for very much, for the older man might have turned his back before the blow fell.
Still, it might be worth while to call Holmes' attention to it. Then there was the peculiar dying reference to a rat.
What could that mean? It could not be delirium. A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly become delirious.
No, it was more likely to be an attempt to explain how he met his fate. But what could it indicate? I cudgelled my brains to find some possible explanation.
What a tissue of mysteries and improbabilities the whole thing was! I did not wonder at Lestrade's opinion, and yet I had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes' insight that I could not lose hope as long as every fresh fact seemed to strengthen his conviction of young McCarthy's innocence.
It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone, for Lestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.
"The glass still keeps very high," he remarked as he sat down. "It is of importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over the ground.
On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and keenest for such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged by a long journey.
None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew who had done it and was screening him or her, but I am convinced now that he is as puzzled as everyone else.
"I cannot admire his taste," I remarked, "if it is indeed a fact that he was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as this Miss Turner."
It was sheer frenzy of this sort which made him throw his hands up into the air when his father, at their last interview, was goading him on to propose to Miss Turner.
On the other hand, he had no means of supporting himself, and his father, who was by all accounts a very hard man, would have thrown him over utterly had he known the truth.
It was with his barmaid wife that he had spent the last three days in Bristol, and his father did not know where he was.
The second is that the murdered man was heard to cry 'Cooee!' before he knew that his son had returned.
Those are the crucial points upon which the case depends. And now let us talk about George Meredith, if you please, and we shall leave all minor matters until to-morrow.
There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning broke bright and cloudless. At nine o'clock Lestrade called for us with the carriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the Boscombe Pool.
"There is serious news this morning," Lestrade observed. "It is said that Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despaired of."
About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his life abroad, and he has been in failing health for some time.
This business has had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of McCarthy's, and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I have learned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free.
Oh, yes! In a hundred other ways he has helped him. Everybody about here speaks of his kindness to him.
It is the more strange, since we know that Turner himself was averse to the idea. The daughter told us as much.
"We have got to the deductions and the inferences," said Lestrade, winking at me. "I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes, without flying away after theories and fancies."
"Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it difficult to get hold of," replied Lestrade with some warmth.
That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy junior and that all theories to the contrary are the merest moonshine.
"Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog," said Holmes, laughing. "But I am very much mistaken if this is not Hatherley Farm upon the left."
"Yes, that is it." It was a widespread, comfortable-looking building, two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches of lichen upon the grey walls.
The drawn blinds and the smokeless chimneys, however, gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of this horror still lay heavy upon it.
We called at the door, when the maid, at Holmes' request, showed us the boots which her master wore at the time of his death, and also a pair of the son's, though not the pair which he had then had.
Having measured these very carefully from seven or eight different points, Holmes desired to be led to the court-yard, from which we all followed the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.
Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent as this. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of Baker Street would have failed to recognise him.
His face flushed and darkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines, while his eyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter.
His face was bent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lips compressed, and the veins stood out like whipcord in his long, sinewy neck.
Swiftly and silently he made his way along the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way of the woods to the Boscombe Pool.
It was damp, marshy ground, as is all that district, and there were marks of many feet, both upon the path and amid the short grass which bounded it on either side.
Sometimes Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and once he made quite a little detour into the meadow.
Lestrade and I walked behind him, the detective indifferent and contemptuous, while I watched my friend with the interest which sprang from the conviction that every one of his actions was directed towards a definite end.
The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of water some fifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between the Hatherley Farm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner.
Above the woods which lined it upon the farther side we could see the red, jutting pinnacles which marked the site of the rich landowner's dwelling.
On the Hatherley side of the pool the woods grew very thick, and there was a narrow belt of sodden grass twenty paces across between the edge of the trees and the reeds which lined the lake.
Lestrade showed us the exact spot at which the body had been found, and, indeed, so moist was the ground, that I could plainly see the traces which had been left by the fall of the stricken man.
To Holmes, as I could see by his eager face and peering eyes, very many other things were to be read upon the trampled grass.
Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its inward twist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there it vanishes among the reeds.
Oh, how simple it would all have been had I been here before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowed all over it.
Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came, and they have covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body.
But here are three separate tracks of the same feet." He drew out a lens and lay down upon his waterproof to have a better view, talking all the time rather to himself than to us.
These are young McCarthy's feet. Twice he was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles are deeply marked and the heels hardly visible.
That bears out his story. He ran when he saw his father on the ground. Then here are the father's feet as he paced up and down.
What is this, then? It is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening. And this? Ha, ha! What have we here?
Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too, quite unusual boots! They come, they go, they come again-of course that was for the cloak.
Holmes traced his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon his face with a little cry of satisfaction.
A jagged stone was lying among the moss, and this also he carefully examined and retained. Then he followed a pathway through the wood until he came to the high road, where all traces were lost.
"It has been a case of considerable interest," he remarked, returning to his natural manner. "I fancy that this grey house on the right must be the lodge.
I think that I will go in and have a word with Moran, and perhaps write a little note. Having done that, we may drive back to our luncheon.
It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and drove back into Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he had picked up in the wood.
The grass was growing under it. It had only lain there a few days. There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken.
Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wears thick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars, uses a cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket.
Lestrade laughed. "I am afraid that I am still a sceptic," he said. "Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with a hard-headed British jury."
"_Nous verrons_," answered Holmes calmly. "You work your own method, and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon, and shall probably return to London by the evening train."
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am a practical man," he said, "and I really cannot undertake to go about the country looking for a left-handed gentleman with a game leg.
"All right," said Holmes quietly. "I have given you the chance. Here are your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line before I leave."
Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where we found lunch upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in thought with a pained expression upon his face, as one who finds himself in a perplexing position.
"Look here, Watson," he said when the cloth was cleared "just sit down in this chair and let me preach to you for a little.
Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about young McCarthy's narrative which struck us both instantly, although they impressed me in his favour and you against him.
One was the fact that his father should, according to his account, cry 'Cooee!' before seeing him. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat.
He mumbled several words, you understand, but that was all that caught the son's ear. Now from this double point our research must commence, and we will begin it by presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true.
Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son, as far as he knew, was in Bristol.
It was mere chance that he was within earshot. The 'Cooee!' was meant to attract the attention of whoever it was that he had the appointment with.
But 'Cooee' is a distinctly Australian cry, and one which is used between Australians. There is a strong presumption that the person whom McCarthy expected to meet him at Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australia.
Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened it out on the table. "This is a map of the Colony of Victoria," he said.
Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his son only caught the last two syllables.
It is obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field down considerably. The possession of a grey garment was a third point which, granting the son's statement to be correct, was a certainty.
We have come now out of mere vagueness to the definite conception of an Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak.
And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can only be approached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could hardly wander.
Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of the ground I gained the trifling details which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade, as to the personality of the criminal.
His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of his stride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces.
The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than his left. He put less weight upon it. Why?
You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded by the surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediately behind, and yet was upon the left side.
Now, how can that be unless it were by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree during the interview between the father and son.
He had even smoked there. I found the ash of a cigar, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enables me to pronounce as an Indian cigar.
I have, as you know, devoted some attention to this, and written a little monograph on the ashes of 140 different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tobacco.
Having found the ash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among the moss where he had tossed it.
I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore he used a holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut was not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife.
"Holmes," I said, "you have drawn a net round this man from which he cannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly as if you had cut the cord which was hanging him.
"Mr. John Turner," cried the hotel waiter, opening the door of our sitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.
"And why did you wish to see me?" He looked across at my companion with despair in his weary eyes, as though his question was already answered.
The old man sank his face in his hands. "God help me!" he cried. "But I would not have let the young man come to harm.
I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It would break her heart-it will break her heart when she hears that I am arrested.
I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter who required my presence here, and I am acting in her interests.
"I am a dying man," said old Turner. "I have had diabetes for years. My doctor says it is a question whether I shall live a month.
Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and a bundle of paper before him. "Just tell us the truth," he said.
I shall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here can witness it. Then I could produce your confession at the last extremity to save young McCarthy.
When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so I smoked a cigar and waited behind a tree until he should be alone.
It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held most dear should be in the power of such a man as this.
Could I not snap the bond? I was already a dying and a desperate man. Though clear of mind and fairly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed.
But my memory and my girl! Both could be saved if I could but silence that foul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes.
I would do it again. Deeply as I have sinned, I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it. But that my girl should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was more than I could suffer.
"Well, it is not for me to judge you," said Holmes as the old man signed the statement which had been drawn out.
In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you will soon have to answer for your deed at a higher court than the Assizes.
I will keep your confession, and if McCarthy is condemned I shall be forced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mortal eye; and your secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safe with us.
"Farewell, then," said the old man solemnly. "Your own deathbeds, when they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace which you have given to mine."
"God help us!" said Holmes after a long silence. "Why does fate play such tricks with poor, helpless worms?
I never hear of such a case as this that I do not think of Baxter's words, and say, 'There, but for the grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.'
James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of a number of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and submitted to the defending counsel.
Old Turner lived for seven months after our interview, but he is now dead; and there is every prospect that the son and daughter may come to live happily together in ignorance of the black cloud which rests upon their past.
There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable in its details and so startling in its results that I am tempted to give some account of it in spite of the fact that there are points in connection with it which never have been, and probably never will be, entirely cleared up.
The year '87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater or less interest, of which I retain the records.
All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none of them present such singular features as the strange train of circumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.
It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales had set in with exceptional violence.
As evening drew in, the storm grew higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a child in the chimney.
My wife was on a visit to her mother's, and for a few days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at Baker Street.
"Why," said I, glancing up at my companion, "that was surely the bell. Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?"
If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out on such a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely to be some crony of the landlady's.
Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came a step in the passage and a tapping at the door.
He stretched out his long arm to turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer must sit.
The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the outside, well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refinement and delicacy in his bearing.
The streaming umbrella which he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather through which he had come.
He looked about him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that his face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is weighed down with some great anxiety.
"I owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez to his eyes. "I trust that I am not intruding.
"Give me your coat and umbrella," said Holmes. "They may rest here on the hook and will be dry presently.
I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast how you saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal.
And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you have ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of events than those which have happened in my own family.
"You fill me with interest," said Holmes. "Pray give us the essential facts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as to those details which seem to me to be most important."
Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuse your patience, there came a night when he made one of those drunken sallies from which he never came back.
We found him, when we went to search for him, face downward in a little green-scummed pool, which lay at the foot of the garden.
There was no sign of any violence, and the water was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard to his known eccentricity, brought in a verdict of 'suicide.'
But I, who knew how he winced from the very thought of death, had much ado to persuade myself that he had gone out of his way to meet it.
The matter passed, however, and my father entered into possession of the estate, and of some £ 14,000, which lay to his credit at the bank.
"One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I foresee, one of the most remarkable to which I have ever listened.
Let me have the date of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date of his supposed suicide.
It was in January, '85, that my poor father met his end, and two years and eight months have elapsed since then.
During that time I have lived happily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope that this curse had passed away from the family, and that it had ended with the last generation.
I had begun to take comfort too soon, however; yesterday morning the blow fell in the very shape in which it had come upon my father.
The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, and turning to the table he shook out upon it five little dried orange pips.
"This is the envelope," he continued. "The postmark is London-eastern division. Within are the very words which were upon my father's last message: 'K.
"To tell the truth"-he sank his face into his thin, white hands-"I have felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits when the snake is writhing towards it.
I seem to be in the grasp of some resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and no precautions can guard against.
"Tut! tut!" cried Sherlock Holmes. "You must act, man, or you are lost. Nothing but energy can save you.
But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced that the inspector has formed the opinion that the letters are all practical jokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really accidents, as the jury stated, and were not to be connected with the warnings.
I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major Prendergast about my troubles and was advised by him to come to you.
It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have acted before this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than that which you have placed before us-no suggestive detail which might help us?
"There is one thing," said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coat pocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted paper, he laid it out upon the table.
"I have some remembrance," said he, "that on the day when my uncle burned the papers I observed that the small, unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of this particular colour.
Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps us much. I think myself that it is a page from some private diary.
Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper, which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from a book.
"Thank you!" said Holmes, folding up the paper and returning it to our visitor. "And now you must on no account lose another instant.
There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must put this piece of paper which you have shown us into the brass box which you have described.
You must also put in a note to say that all the other papers were burned by your uncle, and that this is the only one which remains.
You must assert that in such words as will carry conviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the box out upon the sundial, as directed.
Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I think that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our web to weave, while theirs is already woven.
The first consideration is to remove the pressing danger which threatens you. The second is to clear up the mystery and to punish the guilty parties.
"I thank you," said the young man, rising and pulling on his overcoat. "You have given me fresh life and hope.
Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself in the meanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that you are threatened by a very real and imminent danger.
It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that you may be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yourself too closely.
Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as to the box and the papers. I shall take your advice in every particular.
He shook hands with us and took his leave. Outside the wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pattered against the windows.
This strange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amid the mad elements-blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a gale-and now to have been reabsorbed by them once more.
Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunk forward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire.
Then he lit his pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the blue smoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling.
"I think, Watson," he remarked at last, "that of all our cases we have had none more fantastic than this."
Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems to me to be walking amid even greater perils than did the Sholtos.
Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the arms of his chair, with his finger-tips together.
We have not yet grasped the results which the reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in the study which have baffled all those who have sought a solution by the aid of their senses.
It is not so impossible, however, that a man should possess all knowledge which is likely to be useful to him in his work, and this I have endeavoured in my case to do.
If I remember rightly, you on one occasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined my limits in a very precise fashion.
"Yes," I answered, laughing. "It was a singular document. Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember.
Now, for such a case as the one which has been submitted to us to-night, we need certainly to muster all our resources.
Men at his time of life do not change all their habits and exchange willingly the charming climate of Florida for the lonely life of an English provincial town.
As to what it was he feared, we can only deduce that by considering the formidable letters which were received by himself and his successors.
Excellent. We have already a clue. There can be no doubt that the probability-the strong probability-is that the writer was on board of a ship.
And now let us consider another point. In the case of Pondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its fulfilment, in Dundee it was only some three or four days.
You see how quickly the deed followed the sign when it came from Dundee. If they had come from Pondicherry in a steamer they would have arrived almost as soon as their letter.
But, as a matter of fact, seven weeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeks represented the difference between the mail-boat which brought the letter and the sailing vessel which brought the writer.
More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly urgency of this new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to caution.
The blow has always fallen at the end of the time which it would take the senders to travel the distance.
The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital importance to the person or persons in the sailing-ship.
I think that it is quite clear that there must be more than one of them. A single man could not have carried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive a coroner's jury.
There must have been several in it, and they must have been men of resource and determination. Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it may.
In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be the initials of an individual and becomes the badge of a society.
"Have you never-" said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and sinking his voice-"have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"
"You will observe," said Holmes, laying down the volume, "that the sudden breaking up of the society was coincident with the disappearance of Openshaw from America with their papers.
It may well have been cause and effect. It is no wonder that he and his family have some of the more implacable spirits upon their track.
You can understand that this register and diary may implicate some of the first men in the South, and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it is recovered.
Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remember right, 'sent the pips to A, B, and C'-that is, sent the society's warning to them.
There is nothing more to be said or to be done to-night, so hand me over my violin and let us try to forget for half an hour the miserable weather and the still more miserable ways of our fellow men.
It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a subdued brightness through the dim veil which hangs over the great city.
"You will excuse me for not waiting for you," said he; "I have, I foresee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of young Openshaw's."
It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries. I may have to go down to Horsham, after all.
As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table and glanced my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a chill to my heart.
"Ah!" said he, laying down his cup, "I feared as much. How was it done?" He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.
'Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the H Division, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and a splash in the water.
The night, however, was extremely dark and stormy, so that, in spite of the help of several passers-by, it was quite impossible to effect a rescue.
The alarm, however, was given, and, by the aid of the water-police, the body was eventually recovered.
It proved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it appears from an envelope which was found in his pocket, was John Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham.
The body exhibited no traces of violence, and there can be no doubt that the deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate accident, which should have the effect of calling the attention of the authorities to the condition of the riverside landing-stages.'
"That hurts my pride, Watson," he said at last. "It is a petty feeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride.
It becomes a personal matter with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon this gang.
That he should come to me for help, and that I should send him away to his death-!" He sprang from his chair and paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon his sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and unclasping of his long thin hands.
"They must be cunning devils," he exclaimed at last. "How could they have decoyed him down there? The Embankment is not on the direct line to the station.
The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such a night, for their purpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will win in the long run.
All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in the evening before I returned to Baker Street.
Sherlock Holmes had not come back yet. It was nearly ten o'clock before he entered, looking pale and worn.
He walked up to the sideboard, and tearing a piece from the loaf he devoured it voraciously, washing it down with a long draught of water.
I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not long remain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish trade-mark upon them.
He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces he squeezed out the pips upon the table.
Of these he took five and thrust them into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote "S. H. for J.
O." Then he sealed it and addressed it to "Captain James Calhoun, Barque _Lone Star_, Savannah, Georgia."
"That will await him when he enters port," said he, chuckling. "It may give him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursor of his fate as Openshaw did before him."
"I have spent the whole day," said he, "over Lloyd's registers and files of the old papers, following the future career of every vessel which touched at Pondicherry in January and February in '83.
There were thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported there during those months. Of these, one, the _Lone Star_, instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was reported as having cleared from London, the name is that which is given to one of the states of the Union.
I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque _Lone Star_ was there in January, '85, my suspicion became a certainty.
The _Lone Star_ had arrived here last week. I went down to the Albert Dock and found that she had been taken down the river by the early tide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah.
I wired to Gravesend and learned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is easterly I have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and not very far from the Isle of Wight.
Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn, the only native-born Americans in the ship.
The others are Finns and Germans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship last night.
I had it from the stevedore who has been loading their cargo. By the time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah the mail-boat will have carried this letter, and the cable will have informed the police of Savannah that these three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon a charge of murder.
Very long and very severe were the equinoctial gales that year. We waited long for news of the _Lone Star_ of Savannah, but none ever reached us.
We did at last hear that somewhere far out in the Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boat was seen swinging in the trough of a wave, with the letters "L. S." carved upon it, and that is all which we shall ever know of the fate of the _Lone Star_.
Isa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal of the Theological College of St. George's, was much addicted to opium.
I can see him now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point pupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man.
One night-it was in June, '89-there came a ring to my bell, about the hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the clock.
I sat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work down in her lap and made a little face of disappointment.
We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps upon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in some dark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.
"You will excuse my calling so late," she began, and then, suddenly losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about my wife's neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder.
"Why," said my wife, pulling up her veil, "it is Kate Whitney. How you startled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were when you came in."
"I didn't know what to do, so I came straight to you." That was always the way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds to a lighthouse.
It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine and water, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it.
Oh, no, no! I want the doctor's advice and help, too. It's about Isa. He has not been home for two days.
It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her husband's trouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend and school companion.
We soothed and comforted her by such words as we could find. Did she know where her husband was? Was it possible that we could bring him back to her?
It seems that it was. She had the surest information that of late he had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the farthest east of the City.
Hitherto his orgies had always been confined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and shattered, in the evening.
But now the spell had been upon him eight-and-forty hours, and he lay there, doubtless among the dregs of the docks, breathing in the poison or sleeping off the effects.
There he was to be found, she was sure of it, at the Bar of Gold, in Upper Swandam Lane. But what was she to do?
How could she, a young and timid woman, make her way into such a place and pluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surrounded him?
There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it. Might I not escort her to this place?
And then, as a second thought, why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitney's medical adviser, and as such I had influence over him.
I could manage it better if I were alone. I promised her on my word that I would send him home in a cab within two hours if he were indeed at the address which she had given me.
And so in ten minutes I had left my armchair and cheery sitting-room behind me, and was speeding eastward in a hansom on a strange errand, as it seemed to me at the time, though the future only could show how strange it was to be.
Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approached by a steep flight of steps leading down to a black gap like the mouth of a cave, I found the den of which I was in search.
Ordering my cab to wait, I passed down the steps, worn hollow in the centre by the ceaseless tread of drunken feet; and by the light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I found the latch and made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavy with the brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden berths, like the forecastle of an emigrant ship.
Out of the black shadows there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright, now faint, as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls of the metal pipes.
At the farther end was a small brazier of burning charcoal, beside which on a three-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin old man, with his jaw resting upon his two fists, and his elbows upon his knees, staring into the fire.
As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe for me and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.
"Thank you. I have not come to stay," said I. "There is a friend of mine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him."
There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and peering through the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and unkempt, staring out at me.
"My God! It's Watson," said he. He was in a pitiable state of reaction, with every nerve in a twitter.
"Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What d'you want to frighten a chap for?" He sank his face onto his arms and began to sob in a high treble key.
I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting this two days for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!
So I am. But you've got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here a few hours, three pipes, four pipes-I forget how many.
But I'll go home with you. I wouldn't frighten Kate-poor little Kate. Give me your hand! Have you a cab?
Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I owe, Watson. I am all off colour. I can do nothing for myself.
I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of sleepers, holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the drug, and looking about for the manager.
As I passed the tall man who sat by the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voice whispered, "Walk past me, and then look back at me."
I took two steps forward and looked back. It took all my self-control to prevent me from breaking out into a cry of astonishment.
He made a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he turned his face half round to the company once more, subsided into a doddering, loose-lipped senility.
"As low as you can," he answered; "I have excellent ears. If you would have the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend of yours I should be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you."
Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for he appears to be too limp to get into any mischief.
I should recommend you also to send a note by the cabman to your wife to say that you have thrown in your lot with me.
It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes' requests, for they were always so exceedingly definite, and put forward with such a quiet air of mastery.
In a few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitney's bill, led him out to the cab, and seen him driven through the darkness.
In a very short time a decrepit figure had emerged from the opium den, and I was walking down the street with Sherlock Holmes.
For two streets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot. Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out and burst into a hearty fit of laughter.
"I suppose, Watson," said he, "that you imagine that I have added opium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other little weaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical views."
There is a trap-door at the back of that building, near the corner of Paul's Wharf, which could tell some strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless nights.
Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had £ 1000 for every poor devil who has been done to death in that den.
It is the vilest murder-trap on the whole riverside, and I fear that Neville St. Clair has entered it never to leave it more.
But our trap should be here." He put his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled shrilly-a signal which was answered by a similar whistle from the distance, followed shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses' hoofs.
"Now, Watson," said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through the gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its side lanterns.
Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler still more so. My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one.
Of course you are. You'll know all about it presently. Jump up here. All right, John; we shall not need you.
Beyond lay another dull wilderness of bricks and mortar, its silence broken only by the heavy, regular footfall of the policeman, or the songs and shouts of some belated party of revellers.
A dull wrack was drifting slowly across the sky, and a star or two twinkled dimly here and there through the rifts of the clouds.
We had driven several miles, and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt of suburban villas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, and lit up his pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself that he is acting for the best.
I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before we get to Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow I can get nothing to go upon.
There's plenty of thread, no doubt, but I can't get the end of it into my hand. Now, I'll state the case clearly and concisely to you, Watson, and maybe you can see a spark where all is dark to me.
Now, if you are well up in your London, you will know that the office of the company is in Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper Swandam Lane, where you found me to-night.
So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple who lives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was certainly the last human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair.
His name is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar to every man who goes much to the City.
He is a professional beggar, though in order to avoid the police regulations he pretends to a small trade in wax vestas.
Some little distance down Threadneedle Street, upon the left-hand side, there is, as you may have remarked, a small angle in the wall.
I have watched the fellow more than once before ever I thought of making his professional acquaintance, and I have been surprised at the harvest which he has reaped in a short time.
This is the man whom we now learn to have been the lodger at the opium den, and to have been the last man to see the gentleman of whom we are in quest.
He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in other respects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man.
Surely your medical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb is often compensated for by exceptional strength in the others.
And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they had feared to find. It was Neville St. Clair's coat, and not Neville St. Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded.
No, I don't think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with pennies and half-pennies-421 pennies and 270 half-pennies.
It was no wonder that it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is a different matter.
There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and the house. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remained when the stripped body had been sucked away into the river.
But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the room. Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?
No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose that this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, there is no human eye which could have seen the deed.
What would he do then? It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of the tell-tale garments.
He would seize the coat, then, and be in the act of throwing it out, when it would occur to him that it would swim and not sink.
He throws it out, and would have done the same with the other garments had not he heard the rush of steps below, and only just had time to close the window when the police appeared.
He had for years been known as a professional beggar, but his life appeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one.
I confess that I cannot recall any case within my experience which looked at the first glance so simple and yet which presented such difficulties.
Just as he finished, however, we drove through two scattered villages, where a few lights still glimmered in the windows.
"We are on the outskirts of Lee," said my companion. "We have touched on three English counties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex, passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent.
See that light among the trees? That is The Cedars, and beside that lamp sits a woman whose anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, caught the clink of our horse's feet.
As we approached, the door flew open, and a little blonde woman stood in the opening, clad in some sort of light mousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck and wrists.
She stood with her figure outlined against the flood of light, one hand upon the door, one half-raised in her eagerness, her body slightly bent, her head and face protruded, with eager eyes and parted lips, a standing question.
"Well?" she cried, "well?" And then, seeing that there were two of us, she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw that my companion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.
This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to me in several of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible for me to bring him out and associate him with this investigation.
"I am delighted to see you," said she, pressing my hand warmly. "You will, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in our arrangements, when you consider the blow which has come so suddenly upon us."
"My dear madam," said I, "I am an old campaigner, and if I were not I can very well see that no apology is needed.
"Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said the lady as we entered a well-lit dining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had been laid out, "I should very much like to ask you one or two plain questions, to which I beg that you will give a plain answer."
Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given to fainting. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion.
Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question. "Frankly, now!" she repeated, standing upon the rug and looking keenly down at him as he leaned back in a basket-chair.
Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain how it is that I have received a letter from him to-day.
He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out upon the table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently.
I had left my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The envelope was a very coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend postmark and with the date of that very day, or rather of the day before, for it was considerably after midnight.
The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried itself. The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that blotting-paper has been used.
It is, of course, a trifle, but there is nothing so important as trifles. Let us now see the letter. Ha!
'Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is a huge error which it may take some little time to rectify.
Wait in patience.-NEVILLE.' Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a book, octavo size, no water-mark.
Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a man with a dirty thumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not very much in error, by a person who had been chewing tobacco.
And they were posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, the clouds lighten, though I should not venture to say that the danger is over.
Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent. The ring, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him.
Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is well with him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I should know if evil came upon him.
On the very day that I saw him last he cut himself in the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room rushed upstairs instantly with the utmost certainty that something had happened.
I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman may be more valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoner.
And in this letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence to corroborate your view. But if your husband is alive and able to write letters, why should he remain away from you?
But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at the unexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?
No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, and the Lascar was at the foot of the stairs.
Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the principal points about which I wished to be absolutely clear.
A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our disposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary after my night of adventure.
With these he constructed a sort of Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged, with an ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front of him.
So he sat as I dropped off to sleep, and so he sat when a sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I found the summer sun shining into the apartment.
The pipe was still between his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and the room was full of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of the heap of shag which I had seen upon the previous night.
Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the stable-boy sleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out.
He chuckled to himself as he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to the sombre thinker of the previous night.
As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one was stirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four.
"I want to test a little theory of mine," said he, pulling on his boots. "I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence of one of the most absolute fools in Europe.
"In the bathroom," he answered. "Oh, yes, I am not joking," he continued, seeing my look of incredulity.
I have just been there, and I have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag. Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock.
We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into the bright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and trap, with the half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head.
We both sprang in, and away we dashed down the London Road. A few country carts were stirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but the lines of villas on either side were as silent and lifeless as some city in a dream.
"It has been in some points a singular case," said Holmes, flicking the horse on into a gallop. "I confess that I have been as blind as a mole, but it is better to learn wisdom late than never to learn it at all."
In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily from their windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey side.
Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the river, and dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the right and found ourselves in Bow Street.
Sherlock Holmes was well known to the force, and the two constables at the door saluted him. One of them held the horse's head while the other led us in.
"Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?" A tall, stout official had come down the stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket.
It was a small, office-like room, with a huge ledger upon the table, and a telephone projecting from the wall.
I called about that beggarman, Boone-the one who was charged with being concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee.
Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face is as black as a tinker's. Well, when once his case has been settled, he will have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you would agree with me that he needed it.
"Very good. Come this way, if you please." He led us down a passage, opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and brought us to a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side.
"The third on the right is his," said the inspector. "Here it is!" He quietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the door and glanced through.
We both put our eyes to the grating. The prisoner lay with his face towards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and heavily.
He was a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his calling, with a coloured shirt protruding through the rent in his tattered coat.
He was, as the inspector had said, extremely dirty, but the grime which covered his face could not conceal its repulsive ugliness.
A broad wheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye to chin, and by its contraction had turned up one side of the upper lip, so that three teeth were exposed in a perpetual snarl.
"He certainly needs a wash," remarked Holmes. "I had an idea that he might, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me."
Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that door very quietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectable figure.
"Well, I don't know why not," said the inspector. "He doesn't look a credit to the Bow Street cells, does he?"
He slipped his key into the lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The sleeper half turned, and then settled down once more into a deep slumber.
Holmes stooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge, and then rubbed it twice vigorously across and down the prisoner's face.
Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The man's face peeled off under the sponge like the bark from a tree.
Gone was the coarse brown tint! Gone, too, was the horrid scar which had seamed it across, and the twisted lip which had given the repulsive sneer to the face!
Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into a scream and threw himself down with his face to the pillow.
"Great heavens!" cried the inspector, "it is, indeed, the missing man. I know him from the photograph."
The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandons himself to his destiny. "Be it so," said he.
"With making away with Mr. Neville St.- Oh, come, you can't be charged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide of it," said the inspector with a grin.
If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious that no crime has been committed, and that, therefore, I am illegally detained.
"No crime, but a very great error has been committed," said Holmes. "You would have done better to have trusted your wife."
"It was not the wife; it was the children," groaned the prisoner. "God help me, I would not have them ashamed of their father.
"If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up," said he, "of course you can hardly avoid publicity.
On the other hand, if you convince the police authorities that there is no possible case against you, I do not know that there is any reason that the details should find their way into the papers.
Inspector Bradstreet would, I am sure, make notes upon anything which you might tell us and submit it to the proper authorities.
I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain. I was determined to preserve my disguise as long as possible, and hence my preference for a dirty face.
Knowing that my wife would be terribly anxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to the Lascar at a moment when no constable was watching me, together with a hurried scrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear.
"The police have watched this Lascar," said Inspector Bradstreet, "and I can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post a letter unobserved.
"That was it," said Holmes, nodding approvingly; "I have no doubt of it. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?"
"It must stop here, however," said Bradstreet. "If the police are to hush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone."
In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps may be taken. But if you are found again, then all must come out.
I am sure, Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for having cleared the matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your results.
"I reached this one," said my friend, "by sitting upon five pillows and consuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to Baker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast."
I had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second morning after Christmas, with the intention of wishing him the compliments of the season.
He was lounging upon the sofa in a purple dressing-gown, a pipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and a pile of crumpled morning papers, evidently newly studied, near at hand.
Beside the couch was a wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very seedy and disreputable hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in several places.
A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of the chair suggested that the hat had been suspended in this manner for the purpose of examination.
"Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss my results. The matter is a perfectly trivial one"-he jerked his thumb in the direction of the old hat-"but there are points in connection with it which are not entirely devoid of interest and even of instruction."
I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before his crackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows were thick with the ice crystals.
"I suppose," I remarked, "that, homely as it looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to it-that it is the clue which will guide you in the solution of some mystery and the punishment of some crime."
"So much so," I remarked, "that of the last six cases which I have added to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime."
Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adler papers, to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the adventure of the man with the twisted lip.
Well, I have no doubt that this small matter will fall into the same innocent category. You know Peterson, the commissionaire?
No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will look upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual problem.
And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Peterson's fire.
In front of him he saw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, and carrying a white goose slung over his shoulder.
As he reached the corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger and a little knot of roughs.
One of the latter knocked off the man's hat, on which he raised his stick to defend himself and, swinging it over his head, smashed the shop window behind him.
The roughs had also fled at the appearance of Peterson, so that he was left in possession of the field of battle, and also of the spoils of victory in the shape of this battered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose.
My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that 'For Mrs. Henry Baker' was printed upon a small card which was tied to the bird's left leg, and it is also true that the initials 'H.
B.' are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are some thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easy to restore lost property to any one of them.
He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning, knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me.
The goose we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eaten without unnecessary delay.
Its finder has carried it off, therefore, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinner.
Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gather yourself as to the individuality of the man who has worn this article?
I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round shape, hard and much the worse for wear.
The lining had been of red silk, but was a good deal discoloured. There was no maker's name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials "H.
B." were scrawled upon one side. It was pierced in the brim for a hat-securer, but the elastic was missing.
For the rest, it was cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places, although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide the discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.
On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail, however, to reason from what you see. You are too timid in drawing your inferences.
He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective fashion which was characteristic of him.
That the man was highly intellectual is of course obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was fairly well-to-do within the last three years, although he has now fallen upon evil days.
These are the more patent facts which are to be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way, that it is extremely improbable that he has gas laid on in his house.
Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you these results, you are unable to see how they are attained?
I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I am unable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that this man was intellectual?
For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right over the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose.
"It is a question of cubic capacity," said he; "a man with so large a brain must have something in it."
This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edge came in then. It is a hat of the very best quality.
Look at the band of ribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could afford to buy so expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no hat since, then he has assuredly gone down in the world.
Sherlock Holmes laughed. "Here is the foresight," said he putting his finger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer.
They are never sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of a certain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take this precaution against the wind.
But since we see that he has broken the elastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that he has less foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of a weakening nature.
On the other hand, he has endeavoured to conceal some of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is a sign that he has not entirely lost his self-respect.
The lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cut by the scissors of the barber. They all appear to be adhesive, and there is a distinct odour of lime-cream.
This dust, you will observe, is not the gritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy brown dust of the house, showing that it has been hung up indoors most of the time, while the marks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive that the wearer perspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be in the best of training.
This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dear Watson, with a week's accumulation of dust upon your hat, and when your wife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall fear that you also have been unfortunate enough to lose your wife's affection.
Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to his wife. Remember the card upon the bird's leg.
You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deduce that the gas is not laid on in his house?
"Well, it is very ingenious," said I, laughing; "but since, as you said just now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm done save the loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of energy."
Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flew open, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartment with flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed with astonishment.
"Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped off through the kitchen window?" Holmes twisted himself round upon the sofa to get a fairer view of the man's excited face.
"See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!" He held out his hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantly scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but of such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in the dark hollow of his hand.
Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. "By Jove, Peterson!" said he, "this is treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you have got?"
Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I have read the advertisement about it in _The Times_ every day lately.
It is absolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured, but the reward offered of £ 1000 is certainly not within a twentieth part of the market price.
"A thousand pounds! Great Lord of mercy!" The commissionaire plumped down into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.
That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there are sentimental considerations in the background which would induce the Countess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover the gem.
Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner, a plumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady's jewel-case.
The evidence against him was so strong that the case has been referred to the Assizes. I have some account of the matter here, I believe.
He rummaged amid his newspapers, glancing over the dates, until at last he smoothed one out, doubled it over, and read the following paragraph:
Ryder instantly gave the alarm, and Horner was arrested the same evening; but the stone could not be found either upon his person or in his rooms.
Inspector Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest of Horner, who struggled frantically, and protested his innocence in the strongest terms.
Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery having been given against the prisoner, the magistrate refused to deal summarily with the offence, but referred it to the Assizes.
Horner, who had shown signs of intense emotion during the proceedings, fainted away at the conclusion and was carried out of court.
You see, Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a much more important and less innocent aspect.
Here is the stone; the stone came from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the gentleman with the bad hat and all the other characteristics with which I have bored you.
So now we must set ourselves very seriously to finding this gentleman and ascertaining what part he has played in this little mystery.
To do this, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie undoubtedly in an advertisement in all the evening papers.
Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then: 'Found at the corner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat.
Mr. Henry Baker can have the same by applying at 6:30 this evening at 221B, Baker Street.' That is clear and concise.
Then, again, the introduction of his name will cause him to see it, for everyone who knows him will direct his attention to it.
Oh, in the _Globe_, _Star_, _Pall Mall_, _St. James's Gazette_, _Evening News_, _Standard_, _Echo_, and any others that occur to you.
Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson, just buy a goose on your way back and leave it here with me, for we must have one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which your family is now devouring.
When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and held it against the light. "It's a bonny thing," said he.
Just see how it glints and sparkles. Of course it is a nucleus and focus of crime. Every good stone is.
They are the devil's pet baits. In the larger and older jewels every facet may stand for a bloody deed.
Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor to the gallows and the prison? I'll lock it up in my strong box now and drop a line to the Countess to say that we have it.
It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an absolutely innocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he was carrying was of considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold.
In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall come back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I should like to see the solution of so tangled a business.
Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I believe. By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I ought to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop.
I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past six when I found myself in Baker Street once more.
As I approached the house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which was buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the bright semicircle which was thrown from the fanlight.
"Mr. Henry Baker, I believe," said he, rising from his armchair and greeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he could so readily assume.
Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is a cold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted for summer than for winter.
He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and a broad, intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard of grizzled brown.
A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of his extended hand, recalled Holmes' surmise as to his habits.
His rusty black frock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with the collar turned up, and his lank wrists protruded from his sleeves without a sign of cuff or shirt.
He spoke in a slow staccato fashion, choosing his words with care, and gave the impression generally of a man of learning and letters who had had ill-usage at the hands of fortune.
"We have retained these things for some days," said Holmes, "because we expected to see an advertisement from you giving your address.
Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. "Shillings have not been so plentiful with me as they once were," he remarked.
I had no doubt that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat and the bird. I did not care to spend more money in a hopeless attempt at recovering them.
Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so. But I presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is about the same weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equally well?
No, sir, I think that, with your permission, I will confine my attentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon the sideboard.
"There is your hat, then, and there your bird," said he. "By the way, would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from?
This year our good host, Windigate by name, instituted a goose club, by which, on consideration of some few pence every week, we were each to receive a bird at Christmas.
My pence were duly paid, and the rest is familiar to you. I am much indebted to you, sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years nor my gravity.
"So much for Mr. Henry Baker," said Holmes when he had closed the door behind him. "It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever about the matter.
Our footfalls rang out crisply and loudly as we swung through the doctors' quarter, Wimpole Street, Harley Street, and so through Wigmore Street into Oxford Street.
In a quarter of an hour we were in Bloomsbury at the Alpha Inn, which is a small public-house at the corner of one of the streets which runs down into Holborn.
Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar and ordered two glasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.
Ah! I don't know him. Well, here's your good health landlord, and prosperity to your house. Good-night.
It is possible that our inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of investigation which has been missed by the police, and which a singular chance has placed in our hands.
We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a zigzag of slums to Covent Garden Market.
"Now, then, mister," said he, with his head cocked and his arms akimbo, "what are you driving at? Let's have it straight, now."
Warm! You'd be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. When I pay good money for a good article there should be an end of the business; but it's 'Where are the geese?'
"Well, I have no connection with any other people who have been making inquiries," said Holmes carelessly.
If you won't tell us the bet is off, that is all. But I'm always ready to back my opinion on a matter of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is country bred.
D'you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled them ever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that went to the Alpha were town bred.
It's merely taking your money, for I know that I am right. But I'll have a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to be obstinate.
The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a great greasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanging lamp.
"Now then, Mr. Cocksure," said the salesman, "I thought that I was out of geese, but before I finish you'll find that there is still one left in my shop.
That's the list of the folk from whom I buy. D'you see? Well, then, here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers after their names are where their accounts are in the big ledger.
Now, then! You see this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my town suppliers. Now, look at that third name.
Holmes turned to the page indicated. "Here you are, 'Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.'"
Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from his pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the air of a man whose disgust is too deep for words.
A few yards off he stopped under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion which was peculiar to him.
"When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the 'Pink 'un' protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet," said he.
I daresay that if I had put £ 100 down in front of him, that man would not have given me such complete information as was drawn from him by the idea that he was doing me on a wager.
It is clear from what that surly fellow said that there are others besides ourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I should-
His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke out from the stall which we had just left.
Turning round we saw a little rat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of yellow light which was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, the salesman, framed in the door of his stall, was shaking his fists fiercely at the cringing figure.
"I've had enough of you and your geese," he shouted. "I wish you were all at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more with your silly talk I'll set the dog at you.
You bring Mrs. Oakshott here and I'll answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geese off you?
"Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care. I've had enough of it. Get out of this!" He rushed fiercely forward, and the inquirer flitted away into the darkness.
"Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road," whispered Holmes. "Come with me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow."
Striding through the scattered knots of people who lounged round the flaring stalls, my companion speedily overtook the little man and touched him upon the shoulder.
He sprang round, and I could see in the gas-light that every vestige of colour had been driven from his face.
"You will excuse me," said Holmes blandly, "but I could not help overhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now.
Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are endeavouring to trace some geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, to a salesman named Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windigate, of the Alpha, and by him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a member.
"Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet," cried the little fellow with outstretched hands and quivering fingers.
Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. "In that case we had better discuss it in a cosy room rather than in this wind-swept market-place," said he.
A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. "Well then," said he, "my real name is James Ryder."
Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel Cosmopolitan. Pray step into the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you everything which you would wish to know.
The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us with half-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure whether he is on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe.
Then he stepped into the cab, and in half an hour we were back in the sitting-room at Baker Street. Nothing had been said during our drive, but the high, thin breathing of our new companion, and the claspings and unclaspings of his hands, spoke of the nervous tension within him.
"Here we are!" said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the room. "The fire looks very seasonable in this weather.
You look cold, Mr. Ryder. Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before we settle this little matter of yours.
Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I imagine in which you were interested-white, with a black bar across the tail.
Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I don't wonder that you should take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead-the bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen.
"The game's up, Ryder," said Holmes quietly. "Hold up, man, or you'll be into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson.
He's not got blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash of brandy. So! Now he looks a little more human.
For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy brought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring with frightened eyes at his accuser.
I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which I could possibly need, so there is little which you need tell me.
Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make the case complete. You had heard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess of Morcar's?
What did you do, then? You made some small job in my lady's room-you and your confederate Cusack-and you managed that he should be the man sent for.
Then, when he had left, you rifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this unfortunate man arrested.
Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at my companion's knees. "For God's sake, have mercy!"
I never will again. I swear it. I'll swear it on a Bible. Oh, don't bring it into court! For Christ's sake, don't!
"Get back into your chair!" said Holmes sternly. "It is very well to cringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poor Horner in the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing."
Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account of the next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the goose into the open market?
You heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always answered me like that. My sister thinks that I am going mad.
Sometimes I think that I am myself. And now-and now I am myself a branded thief, without ever having touched the wealth for which I sold my character.
There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and by the measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes' finger-tips upon the edge of the table.
And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon the stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running footfalls from the street.
"After all, Watson," said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his clay pipe, "I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies.
If Horner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow will not appear against him, and the case must collapse.
I suppose that I am commuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul. This fellow will not go wrong again; he is too terribly frightened.
Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bird for life. Besides, it is the season of forgiveness.
Chance has put in our way a most singular and whimsical problem, and its solution is its own reward. If you will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we will begin another investigation, in which, also a bird will be the chief feature.
Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall any which presented more singular features than that which was associated with the well-known Surrey family of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran.
The events in question occurred in the early days of my association with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors in Baker Street.
It is perhaps as well that the facts should now come to light, for I have reasons to know that there are widespread rumours as to the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter even more terrible than the truth.
It was early in April in the year '83 that I woke one morning to find Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed.
He was a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the mantelpiece showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, I blinked up at him in some surprise, and perhaps just a little resentment, for I was myself regular in my habits.
"Very sorry to knock you up, Watson," said he, "but it's the common lot this morning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she retorted upon me, and I on you."
No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a considerable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me.
Should it prove to be an interesting case, you would, I am sure, wish to follow it from the outset. I thought, at any rate, that I should call you and give you the chance.
I rapidly threw on my clothes and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my friend down to the sitting-room.
"Good-morning, madam," said Holmes cheerily. "My name is Sherlock Holmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before myself.
Ha! I am glad to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray draw up to it, and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe that you are shivering.
"It is not cold which makes me shiver," said the woman in a low voice, changing her seat as requested.
Her features and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot with premature grey, and her expression was weary and haggard.
"You must not fear," said he soothingly, bending forward and patting her forearm. "We shall soon set matters right, I have no doubt.
No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm of your left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had a good drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached the station.
"There is no mystery, my dear madam," said he, smiling. "The left arm of your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven places.
The marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cart which throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-hand side of the driver.
"Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct," said she. "I started from home before six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past, and came in by the first train to Waterloo.
Sir, I can stand this strain no longer; I shall go mad if it continues. I have no one to turn to-none, save only one, who cares for me, and he, poor fellow, can be of little aid.
I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs. Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of her sore need.
It was from her that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could help me, too, and at least throw a little light through the dense darkness which surrounds me?
At present it is out of my power to reward you for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall be married, with the control of my own income, and then at least you shall not find me ungrateful.
"Farintosh," said he. "Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concerned with an opal tiara. I think it was before your time, Watson.
I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same care to your case as I did to that of your friend.
As to reward, my profession is its own reward; but you are at liberty to defray whatever expenses I may be put to, at the time which suits you best.
And now I beg that you will lay before us everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon the matter.
He does not say so, but I can read it from his soothing answers and averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart.
My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, who is the last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, the Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surrey.
You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I had no great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us, and for a long time we did all the work of the house.
She was but thirty at the time of her death, and yet her hair had already begun to whiten, even as mine has.
We had, however, an aunt, my mother's maiden sister, Miss Honoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we were occasionally allowed to pay short visits at this lady's house.
Julia went there at Christmas two years ago, and met there a half-pay major of marines, to whom she became engaged.
My stepfather learned of the engagement when my sister returned and offered no objection to the marriage; but within a fortnight of the day which had been fixed for the wedding, the terrible event occurred which has deprived me of my only companion.
Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes closed and his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened his lids now and glanced across at his visitor.
It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time is seared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said, very old, and only one wing is now inhabited.
The bedrooms in this wing are on the ground floor, the sitting-rooms being in the central block of the buildings.
Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylott's, the second my sister's, and the third my own. There is no communication between them, but they all open out into the same corridor.
'Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.' She smiled back at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn in the lock.
I think that I mentioned to you that the Doctor kept a cheetah and a baboon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were locked.
It was a wild night. The wind was howling outside, and the rain was beating and splashing against the windows.
Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that it was my sister's voice.
As I ran down the passage, my sister's door was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon its hinges. I stared at it horror-stricken, not knowing what was about to issue from it.
By the light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sister appear at the opening, her face blanched with terror, her hands groping for help, her whole figure swaying to and fro like that of a drunkard.
I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at that moment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground.
I rushed out, calling loudly for my stepfather, and I met him hastening from his room in his dressing-gown.
"One moment," said Holmes, "are you sure about this whistle and metallic sound? Could you swear to it?"
That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It is my strong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the gale and the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been deceived.
No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found the charred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box.
Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her when the alarm took place. That is important.
He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott's conduct had long been notorious in the county, but he was unable to find any satisfactory cause of death.
My evidence showed that the door had been fastened upon the inner side, and the windows were blocked by old-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured every night.
The walls were carefully sounded, and were shown to be quite solid all round, and the flooring was also thoroughly examined, with the same result.
The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four large staples. It is certain, therefore, that my sister was quite alone when she met her end.
It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, though what it was that frightened her I cannot imagine.
Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of delirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people, perhaps to these very gipsies in the plantation.
I do not know whether the spotted handkerchiefs which so many of them wear over their heads might have suggested the strange adjective which she used.
I sprang up and lit the lamp, but nothing was to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, however, so I dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got a dog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come on this morning with the one object of seeing you and asking your advice.
For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed the hand that lay upon our visitor's knee.
The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist. "He is a hard man," she said, "and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength."
There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin upon his hands and stared into the crackling fire.
"This is a very deep business," he said at last. "There are a thousand details which I should desire to know before I decide upon our course of action.
Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we were to come to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see over these rooms without the knowledge of your stepfather?
As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some most important business. It is probable that he will be away all day, and that there would be nothing to disturb you.
I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am in town. But I shall return by the twelve o'clock train, so as to be there in time for your coming.
And you may expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself some small business matters to attend to.
No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have confided my trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again this afternoon.
Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and walls are sound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, then her sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her mysterious end.
What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and what of the very peculiar words of the dying woman?
When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of a band of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, the fact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has an interest in preventing his stepdaughter's marriage, the dying allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner heard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place, I think that there is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared along those lines.
And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going to Stoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are fatal, or if they may be explained away.
The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that our door had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had framed himself in the aperture.
His costume was a peculiar mixture of the professional and of the agricultural, having a black top-hat, a long frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop swinging in his hand.
So tall was he that his hat actually brushed the cross bar of the doorway, and his breadth seemed to span it across from side to side.
A large face, seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and marked with every evil passion, was turned from one to the other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin, fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old bird of prey.
I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughter has been here. I have traced her. What has she been saying to you?
"Ha! You put me off, do you?" said our new visitor, taking a step forward and shaking his hunting-crop.
Holmes chuckled heartily. "Your conversation is most entertaining," said he. "When you go out close the door, for there is a decided draught."
I will go when I have had my say. Don't you dare to meddle with my affairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here.
I traced her! I am a dangerous man to fall foul of! See here." He stepped swiftly forward, seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown hands.
"See that you keep yourself out of my grip," he snarled, and hurling the twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the room.
"He seems a very amiable person," said Holmes, laughing. "I am not quite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him that my grip was not much more feeble than his own."
And now, Watson, we shall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk down to Doctors' Commons, where I hope to get some data which may help us in this matter.
It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from his excursion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled over with notes and figures.
"I have seen the will of the deceased wife," said he. "To determine its exact meaning I have been obliged to work out the present prices of the investments with which it is concerned.
The total income, which at the time of the wife's death was little short of £ 1,100, is now, through the fall in agricultural prices, not more than £ 750.
My morning's work has not been wasted, since it has proved that he has the very strongest motives for standing in the way of anything of the sort.
And now, Watson, this is too serious for dawdling, especially as the old man is aware that we are interesting ourselves in his affairs; so if you are ready, we shall call a cab and drive to Waterloo.
I should be very much obliged if you would slip your revolver into your pocket. An Eley's No. 2 is an excellent argument with gentlemen who can twist steel pokers into knots.
At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhead, where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove for four or five miles through the lovely Surrey lanes.
To me at least there was a strange contrast between the sweet promise of the spring and this sinister quest upon which we were engaged.
My companion sat in the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down over his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the deepest thought.
A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening into a grove at the highest point.
"And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner," observed Holmes, shading his eyes. "Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest."
"I thought it as well," said Holmes as we climbed the stile, "that this fellow should think we had come here as architects, or on some definite business.
Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a face which spoke her joy. "I have been waiting so eagerly for you," she cried, shaking hands with us warmly.
All has turned out splendidly. Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be back before evening.
"We have had the pleasure of making the Doctor's acquaintance," said Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred.
He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someone more cunning than himself upon his track.
You must lock yourself up from him to-night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to your aunt's at Harrow.
Now, we must make the best use of our time, so kindly take us at once to the rooms which we are to examine.
The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high central portion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown out on each side.
In one of these wings the windows were broken and blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly caved in, a picture of ruin.
Some scaffolding had been erected against the end wall, and the stone-work had been broken into, but there were no signs of any workmen at the moment of our visit.
Holmes walked slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deep attention the outsides of the windows.
This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, the centre one to your sister's, and the one next to the main building to Dr. Roylott's chamber?
Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does not seem to be any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall.
Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wing runs the corridor from which these three rooms open.
As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachable from that side. Now, would you have the kindness to go into your room and bar your shutters?
Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination through the open window, endeavoured in every way to force the shutter open, but without success.
There was no slit through which a knife could be passed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, but they were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry.
"Hum!" said he, scratching his chin in some perplexity, "my theory certainly presents some difficulties.
No one could pass these shutters if they were bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon the matter.
It was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, after the fashion of old country-houses.
A brown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrow white-counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on the left-hand side of the window.
These articles, with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in the room save for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre.
The boards round and the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old and discoloured that it may have dated from the original building of the house.
Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down, taking in every detail of the apartment.
"Where does that bell communicate with?" he asked at last pointing to a thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, the tassel actually lying upon the pillow.
Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there. You will excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to this floor.
He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in his hand and crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining minutely the cracks between the boards.
Then he did the same with the wood-work with which the chamber was panelled. Finally he walked over to the bed and spent some time in staring at it and in running his eye up and down the wall.
No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. You can see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where the little opening for the ventilator is.
"Very strange!" muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. "There are one or two very singular points about this room.
For example, what a fool a builder must be to open a ventilator into another room, when, with the same trouble, he might have communicated with the outside air!
They seem to have been of a most interesting character-dummy bell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate.
Dr. Grimesby Roylott's chamber was larger than that of his step-daughter, but was as plainly furnished.
Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet a saucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, I daresay.
There is one point which I should wish to determine." He squatted down in front of the wooden chair and examined the seat of it with the greatest attention.
"Thank you. That is quite settled," said he, rising and putting his lens in his pocket. "Hullo! Here is something interesting!"
The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on one corner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself and tied so as to make a loop of whipcord.
That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it's a wicked world, and when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all.
I think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with your permission we shall walk out upon the lawn.
I had never seen my friend's face so grim or his brow so dark as it was when we turned from the scene of this investigation.
We had walked several times up and down the lawn, neither Miss Stoner nor myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused himself from his reverie.
"It is very essential, Miss Stoner," said he, "that you should absolutely follow my advice in every respect."
We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate the cause of this noise which has disturbed you.
"I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind," said Miss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion's sleeve.
No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some more tangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr. Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain.
Good-bye, and be brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may rest assured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you.
At dusk we saw Dr. Grimesby Roylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside the little figure of the lad who drove him.
The boy had some slight difficulty in undoing the heavy iron gates, and we heard the hoarse roar of the Doctor's voice and saw the fury with which he shook his clinched fists at him.
The trap drove on, and a few minutes later we saw a sudden light spring up among the trees as the lamp was lit in one of the sitting-rooms.
"Do you know, Watson," said Holmes as we sat together in the gathering darkness, "I have really some scruples as to taking you to-night.
I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose that could answer I confess is more than I can imagine.
Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to have a small opening between two rooms.
Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her sister could smell Dr. Roylott's cigar.
Now, of course that suggested at once that there must be a communication between the two rooms. It could only be a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at the coroner's inquiry.
Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilator is made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies.
The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the same relative position to the ventilator and to the rope-or so we may call it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull.
"Holmes," I cried, "I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. We are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime."
Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he is the first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge.
Palmer and Pritchard were among the heads of their profession. This man strikes even deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strike deeper still.
But we shall have horrors enough before the night is over; for goodness' sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our minds for a few hours to something more cheerful.
About nine o'clock the light among the trees was extinguished, and all was dark in the direction of the Manor House.
Two hours passed slowly away, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of eleven, a single bright light shone out right in front of us.
As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord, explaining that we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance, and that it was possible that we might spend the night there.
A moment later we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowing in our faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us through the gloom to guide us on our sombre errand.
There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for unrepaired breaches gaped in the old park wall.
Making our way among the trees, we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about to enter through the window when out from a clump of laurel bushes there darted what seemed to be a hideous and distorted child, who threw itself upon the grass with writhing limbs and then ran swiftly across the lawn into the darkness.
Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like a vice upon my wrist in his agitation.
I had forgotten the strange pets which the Doctor affected. There was a cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at any moment.
I confess that I felt easier in my mind when, after following Holmes' example and slipping off my shoes, I found myself inside the bedroom.
My companion noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the lamp onto the table, and cast his eyes round the room.
All was as we had seen it in the daytime. Then creeping up to me and making a trumpet of his hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently that it was all that I could do to distinguish the words:
Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistol ready in case we should need it.
Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon the bed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of a candle.
From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once at our very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that the cheetah was indeed at liberty.
Far away we could hear the deep tones of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an hour.
How long they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and one and two and three, and still we sat waiting silently for whatever might befall.
Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the direction of the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded by a strong smell of burning oil and heated metal.
Someone in the next room had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle sound of movement, and then all was silent once more, though the smell grew stronger.
For half an hour I sat with straining ears. Then suddenly another sound became audible-a very gentle, soothing sound, like that of a small jet of steam escaping continually from a kettle.
The instant that we heard it, Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously with his cane at the bell-pull.
It swelled up louder and louder, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingled in the one dreadful shriek.
They say that away down in the village, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry raised the sleepers from their beds.
It struck cold to our hearts, and I stood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the last echoes of it had died away into the silence from which it rose.
"It means that it is all over," Holmes answered. "And perhaps, after all, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr. Roylott's room."
With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor. Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply from within.
It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a dark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam of light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar.
Beside this table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a long grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feet thrust into red heelless Turkish slippers.
Across his lap lay the short stock with the long lash which we had noticed during the day. His chin was cocked upward and his eyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare at the corner of the ceiling.
Round his brow he had a peculiar yellow band, with brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round his head.
I took a step forward. In an instant his strange headgear began to move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squat diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.
"It is a swamp adder!" cried Holmes; "the deadliest snake in India. He has died within ten seconds of being bitten.
Violence does, in truth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls into the pit which he digs for another.
Let us thrust this creature back into its den, and we can then remove Miss Stoner to some place of shelter and let the county police know what has happened.
As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man's lap, and throwing the noose round the reptile's neck he drew it from its horrid perch and, carrying it at arm's length, threw it into the iron safe, which he closed upon it.
The little which I had yet to learn of the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled back next day.
The sight of the safe, the saucer of milk, and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally dispel any doubts which may have remained.
The metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner was obviously caused by her stepfather hastily closing the door of his safe upon its terrible occupant.
Having once made up my mind, you know the steps which I took in order to put the matter to the proof.
I heard the creature hiss as I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly lit the light and attacked it.
And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master at the other side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused its snakish temper, so that it flew upon the first person it saw.
In this way I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylott's death, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very heavily upon my conscience.
At the time the circumstances made a deep impression upon me, and the lapse of two years has hardly served to weaken the effect.
It was in the summer of '89, not long after my marriage, that the events occurred which I am now about to summarise.
My practice had steadily increased, and as I happened to live at no very great distance from Paddington Station, I got a few patients from among the officials.
One of these, whom I had cured of a painful and lingering disease, was never weary of advertising my virtues and of endeavouring to send me on every sufferer over whom he might have any influence.
One morning, at a little before seven o'clock, I was awakened by the maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had come from Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room.
I dressed hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases were seldom trivial, and hastened downstairs.
"What is it, then?" I asked, for his manner suggested that it was some strange creature which he had caged up in my room.
"It's a new patient," he whispered. "I thought I'd bring him round myself; then he couldn't slip away.
There he is, all safe and sound. I must go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the same as you." And off he went, this trusty tout, without even giving me time to thank him.
I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by the table. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a soft cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books.
Round one of his hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all over with bloodstains. He was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong, masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale and gave me the impression of a man who was suffering from some strong agitation, which it took all his strength of mind to control.
"I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor," said he, "but I have had a very serious accident during the night.
I came in by train this morning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I might find a doctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here.
I took it up and glanced at it. "Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulic engineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor)."
That was the name, style, and abode of my morning visitor. "I regret that I have kept you waiting," said I, sitting down in my library-chair.
"Oh, my night could not be called monotonous," said he, and laughed. He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in his chair and shaking his sides.
It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hysterical outbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis is over and gone.
"Not at all. Drink this." I dashed some brandy into the water, and the colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.
"That's better!" said he. "And now, Doctor, perhaps you would kindly attend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumb used to be."
He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even my hardened nerves a shudder to look at it.
There were four protruding fingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb should have been.
Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I think that I must have been senseless for a long time.
When I came to I found that it was still bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very tightly round the wrist and braced it up with a twig.
I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally covered it over with cotton wadding and carbolised bandages.
Capital! Between your brandy and your bandage, I feel a new man. I was very weak, but I have had a good deal to go through.
Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but, between ourselves, if it were not for the convincing evidence of this wound of mine, I should be surprised if they believed my statement, for it is a very extraordinary one, and I have not much in the way of proof with which to back it up; and, even if they believe me, the clues which I can give them are so vague that it is a question whether justice will be done.
"Ha!" cried I, "if it is anything in the nature of a problem which you desire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come to my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the official police."
"Oh, I have heard of that fellow," answered my visitor, "and I should be very glad if he would take the matter up, though of course I must use the official police as well.
We'll call a cab and go together. We shall just be in time to have a little breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?
"Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in an instant." I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly to my wife, and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my new acquaintance to Baker Street.
He received us in his quietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers and eggs, and joined us in a hearty meal.
When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintance upon the sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass of brandy and water within his reach.
"It is easy to see that your experience has been no common one, Mr. Hatherley," said he. "Pray, lie down there and make yourself absolutely at home.
Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired and keep up your strength with a little stimulant.
"Thank you," said my patient, "but I have felt another man since the doctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has completed the cure.
I shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, so I shall start at once upon my peculiar experiences.
Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded expression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat opposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange story which our visitor detailed to us.
At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my station. However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and I reached the little dim-lit station after eleven o'clock.
I was the only passenger who got out there, and there was no one upon the platform save a single sleepy porter with a lantern.
As I passed out through the wicket gate, however, I found my acquaintance of the morning waiting in the shadow upon the other side.
Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried me into a carriage, the door of which was standing open.
He drew up the windows on either side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we went as fast as the horse could go.
It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I determined to wait until I got back to town before telling my story to the police.
It was a little past six when I arrived, so I went first to have my wound dressed, and then the doctor was kind enough to bring me along here.
We both sat in silence for some little time after listening to this extraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock Holmes pulled down from the shelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in which he placed his cuttings.
"Here is an advertisement which will interest you," said he. "It appeared in all the papers about a year ago.
Listen to this: 'Lost, on the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a hydraulic engineer.
Left his lodgings at ten o'clock at night, and has not been heard of since. Was dressed in,' etc., etc.
Well, every moment now is precious, so if you feel equal to it we shall go down to Scotland Yard at once as a preliminary to starting for Eyford.
Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the train together, bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village.
There were Sherlock Holmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector Bradstreet, of Scotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself.
Bradstreet had spread an ordnance map of the county out upon the seat and was busy with his compasses drawing a circle with Eyford for its centre.
"There you are," said he. "That circle is drawn at a radius of ten miles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near that line.
"What I cannot understand," said I, "is why they should have spared you when they found you lying fainting in the garden.
"Oh, we shall soon clear up all that," said Bradstreet. "Well, I have drawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it the folk that we are in search of are to be found."
"Really, now!" cried the inspector, "you have formed your opinion! Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you.
"And I am for north," said I, "because there are no hills there, and our friend says that he did not notice the carriage go up any."
"Come," cried the inspector, laughing; "it's a very pretty diversity of opinion. We have boxed the compass among us.
"Oh, yes, you can. This is my point." He placed his finger in the centre of the circle. "This is where we shall find them."
Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that the horse was fresh and glossy when you got in.
"Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough," observed Bradstreet thoughtfully. "Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature of this gang."
"None at all," said Holmes. "They are coiners on a large scale, and have used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken the place of silver."
"We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work," said the inspector. "They have been turning out half-crowns by the thousand.
We even traced them as far as Reading, but could get no farther, for they had covered their traces in a way that showed that they were very old hands.
But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not destined to fall into the hands of justice.
As we rolled into Eyford Station we saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed up from behind a small clump of trees in the neighbourhood and hung like an immense ostrich feather over the landscape.
The station-master laughed heartily. "No, sir, Dr. Becher is an Englishman, and there isn't a man in the parish who has a better-lined waistcoat.
But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, as I understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if a little good Berkshire beef would do him no harm.
The station-master had not finished his speech before we were all hastening in the direction of the fire.
The road topped a low hill, and there was a great widespread whitewashed building in front of us, spouting fire at every chink and window, while in the garden in front three fire-engines were vainly striving to keep the flames under.
"That's it!" cried Hatherley, in intense excitement. "There is the gravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay.
Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of last night, though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off by now.
And Holmes' fears came to be realised, for from that day to this no word has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the sinister German, or the morose Englishman.
Early that morning a peasant had met a cart containing several people and some very bulky boxes driving rapidly in the direction of Reading, but there all traces of the fugitives disappeared, and even Holmes' ingenuity failed ever to discover the least clue as to their whereabouts.
The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangements which they had found within, and still more so by discovering a newly severed human thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor.
Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered stored in an out-house, but no coins were to be found, which may have explained the presence of those bulky boxes which have been already referred to.
He had evidently been carried down by two persons, one of whom had remarkably small feet and the other unusually large ones.
On the whole, it was most probable that the silent Englishman, being less bold or less murderous than his companion, had assisted the woman to bear the unconscious man out of the way of danger.
"Well," said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to return once more to London, "it has been a pretty business for me!
"Experience," said Holmes, laughing. "Indirectly it may be of value, you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputation of being excellent company for the remainder of your existence."
The Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, have long ceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circles in which the unfortunate bridegroom moves.
Fresh scandals have eclipsed it, and their more piquant details have drawn the gossips away from this four-year-old drama.
As I have reason to believe, however, that the full facts have never been revealed to the general public, and as my friend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in clearing the matter up, I feel that no memoir of him would be complete without some little sketch of this remarkable episode.
With my body in one easy-chair and my legs upon another, I had surrounded myself with a cloud of newspapers until at last, saturated with the news of the day, I tossed them all aside and lay listless, watching the huge crest and monogram upon the envelope upon the table and wondering lazily who my friend's noble correspondent could be.
"Here is a very fashionable epistle," I remarked as he entered. "Your morning letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-monger and a tide-waiter."
"Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety," he answered, smiling, "and the humbler are usually the more interesting.
This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call upon a man either to be bored or to lie.
I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of my client is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of his case.
It is just possible, however, that that also may not be wanting in this new investigation. You have been reading the papers diligently of late, have you not?
"It looks like it," said I ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in the corner. "I have had nothing else to do."
It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. I read nothing except the criminal news and the agony column.
The latter is always instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closely you must have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding?
"It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and the noble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outer side of his right little finger," remarked Holmes as he folded up the epistle.
Then I have just time, with your assistance, to get clear upon the subject. Turn over those papers and arrange the extracts in their order of time, while I take a glance as to who our client is.
He picked a red-covered volume from a line of books of reference beside the mantelpiece. "Here he is," said he, sitting down and flattening it out upon his knee.
'Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral.' Hum! 'Arms: Azure, three caltrops in chief over a fess sable.
Born in 1846.' He's forty-one years of age, which is mature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary for the colonies in a late administration.
The Duke, his father, was at one time Secretary for Foreign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, and Tudor on the distaff side.
Ha! Well, there is nothing very instructive in all this. I think that I must turn to you Watson, for something more solid.
"I have very little difficulty in finding what I want," said I, "for the facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me as remarkable.
I feared to refer them to you, however, as I knew that you had an inquiry on hand and that you disliked the intrusion of other matters.
Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniture van. That is quite cleared up now-though, indeed, it was obvious from the first.
One by one the management of the noble houses of Great Britain is passing into the hands of our fair cousins from across the Atlantic.
An important addition has been made during the last week to the list of the prizes which have been borne away by these charming invaders.
As it is an open secret that the Duke of Balmoral has been compelled to sell his pictures within the last few years, and as Lord St. Simon has no property of his own save the small estate of Birchmoor, it is obvious that the Californian heiress is not the only gainer by an alliance which will enable her to make the easy and common transition from a Republican lady to a British peeress.'
Two days later-that is, on Wednesday last-there is a curt announcement that the wedding had taken place, and that the honeymoon would be passed at Lord Backwater's place, near Petersfield.
They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally during the honeymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt as this.
The whole party proceeded afterwards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at Lancaster Gate, where breakfast had been prepared.
One of the footmen declared that he had seen a lady leave the house thus apparelled, but had refused to credit that it was his mistress, believing her to be with the company.
Up to a late hour last night, however, nothing had transpired as to the whereabouts of the missing lady.
There are rumours of foul play in the matter, and it is said that the police have caused the arrest of the woman who had caused the original disturbance, in the belief that, from jealousy or some other motive, she may have been concerned in the strange disappearance of the bride.'
There are no further particulars, and the whole case is in your hands now-so far as it has been set forth in the public press.
Do not dream of going, Watson, for I very much prefer having a witness, if only as a check to my own memory.
His manner was brisk, and yet his general appearance gave an undue impression of age, for he had a slight forward stoop and a little bend of the knees as he walked.
His hair, too, as he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round the edges and thin upon the top.
As to his dress, it was careful to the verge of foppishness, with high collar, black frock-coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes, and light-coloured gaiters.
He advanced slowly into the room, turning his head from left to right, and swinging in his right hand the cord which held his golden eyeglasses.
"Good-day, Lord St. Simon," said Holmes, rising and bowing. "Pray take the basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson.
A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr. Holmes. I have been cut to the quick.
I understand that you have already managed several delicate cases of this sort, sir, though I presume that they were hardly from the same class of society.
"You can understand," said Holmes suavely, "that I extend to the affairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to you in yours."
Of course! Very right! very right! I'm sure I beg pardon. As to my own case, I am ready to give you any information which may assist you in forming an opinion.
Thank you. I have already learned all that is in the public prints, nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correct-this article, for example, as to the disappearance of the bride.
But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone could offer an opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most directly by questioning you.
In mining. He had nothing a few years ago. Then he struck gold, invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds.
The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down into the fire. "You see, Mr. Holmes," said he, "my wife was twenty before her father became a rich man.
During that time she ran free in a mining camp and wandered through woods or mountains, so that her education has come from Nature rather than from the schoolmaster.
She is what we call in England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild and free, unfettered by any sort of traditions.
She is impetuous-volcanic, I was about to say. She is swift in making up her mind and fearless in carrying out her resolutions.
On the other hand, I would not have given her the name which I have the honour to bear"-he gave a little stately cough-"had I not thought her to be at bottom a noble woman.
I believe that she is capable of heroic self-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable would be repugnant to her.
Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it. Then he closed the locket and handed it back to Lord St. Simon.
Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season. I met her several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her.
Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had ever seen that her temper was just a little sharp.
Oh, it is childish. She dropped her bouquet as we went towards the vestry. She was passing the front pew at the time, and it fell over into the pew.
There was a moment's delay, but the gentleman in the pew handed it up to her again, and it did not appear to be the worse for the fall.
Yet when I spoke to her of the matter, she answered me abruptly; and in the carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdly agitated over this trifling cause.
Indeed! You say that there was a gentleman in the pew. Some of the general public were present, then?
No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite a common-looking person. I hardly noticed his appearance.
Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wedding in a less cheerful frame of mind than she had gone to it.
A little too much so. It seemed to me that her mistress allowed her to take great liberties. Still, of course, in America they look upon these things in a different way.
Lady St. Simon said something about 'jumping a claim.' She was accustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she meant.
American slang is very expressive sometimes. And what did your wife do when she finished speaking to her maid?
No, alone. She was very independent in little matters like that. Then, after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose hurriedly, muttered some words of apology, and left the room.
But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to her room, covered her bride's dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet, and went out.
Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park in company with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and who had already made a disturbance at Mr. Doran's house that morning.
Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows. "We have been on a friendly footing for some years-I may say on a very friendly footing.
She used to be at the Allegro. I have not treated her ungenerously, and she had no just cause of complaint against me, but you know what women are, Mr. Holmes.
Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as so serious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid some terrible trap for her.
Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of characters. Pray what is your own theory as to what took place?
Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I have given you all the facts. Since you ask me, however, I may say that it has occurred to me as possible that the excitement of this affair, the consciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, had the effect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife.
Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back-I will not say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to without success-I can hardly explain it in any other fashion.
"Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis," said Holmes, smiling. "And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that I have nearly all my data.
Lord St. Simon shook his head. "I am afraid that it will take wiser heads than yours or mine," he remarked, and bowing in a stately, old-fashioned manner he departed.
"It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by putting it on a level with his own," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing.
I think that I shall have a whisky and soda and a cigar after all this cross-questioning. I had formed my conclusions as to the case before our client came into the room.
I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I remarked before, which were quite as prompt.
My whole examination served to turn my conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence is occasionally very convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk, to quote Thoreau's example.
It is one of these cases-but, hullo, here is Lestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra tumbler upon the sideboard, and there are cigars in the box.
The official detective was attired in a pea-jacket and cravat, which gave him a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carried a black canvas bag in his hand.
And I feel dissatisfied. It is this infernal St. Simon marriage case. I can make neither head nor tail of the business.
Who ever heard of such a mixed affair? Every clue seems to slip through my fingers. I have been at work upon it all day.
"And very wet it seems to have made you," said Holmes laying his hand upon the arm of the pea-jacket.
"There," said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon the top of the pile. "There is a little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes."
"Oh, indeed!" said my friend, blowing blue rings into the air. "You dragged them from the Serpentine?"
No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper. They have been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if the clothes were there the body would not be far off.
By the same brilliant reasoning, every man's body is to be found in the neighbourhood of his wardrobe.
"Are you, indeed, now?" cried Lestrade with some bitterness. "I am afraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with your deductions and your inferences.
In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In the card-case is a note. And here is the very note.
He slapped it down upon the table in front of him. "Listen to this: 'You will see me when all is ready.
Come at once. F. H. M.' Now my theory all along has been that Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Flora Millar, and that she, with confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her disappearance.
Here, signed with her initials, is the very note which was no doubt quietly slipped into her hand at the door and which lured her within their reach.
Lestrade rose in his triumph and bent his head to look. "Why," he shrieked, "you're looking at the wrong side!"
"There's nothing in it. I looked at it before," said Lestrade. "'Oct. 4th, rooms 8_s_., breakfast 2_s_.
Very likely not. It is most important, all the same. As to the note, it is important also, or at least the initials are, so I congratulate you again.
"I've wasted time enough," said Lestrade, rising. "I believe in hard work and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories.
Good-day, Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of the matter first." He gathered up the garments, thrust them into the bag, and made for the door.
"Just one hint to you, Lestrade," drawled Holmes before his rival vanished; "I will tell you the true solution of the matter.
Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me, tapped his forehead three times, shook his head solemnly, and hurried away.
He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose to put on his overcoat. "There is something in what the fellow says about outdoor work," he remarked, "so I think, Watson, that I must leave you to your papers for a little."
It was after five o'clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had no time to be lonely, for within an hour there arrived a confectioner's man with a very large flat box.
Having laid out all these luxuries, my two visitors vanished away, like the genii of the Arabian Nights, with no explanation save that the things had been paid for and were ordered to this address.
Just before nine o'clock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into the room. His features were gravely set, but there was a light in his eye which made me think that he had not been disappointed in his conclusions.
"Yes, I fancy we may have some company dropping in," said he. "I am surprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived.
It was indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in, dangling his glasses more vigorously than ever, and with a very perturbed expression upon his aristocratic features.
Yes, and I confess that the contents startled me beyond measure. Have you good authority for what you say?
"What will the Duke say," he murmured, "when he hears that one of the family has been subjected to such humiliation?"
I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can hardly see how the lady could have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of doing it was undoubtedly to be regretted.
He opened the door and ushered in a lady and gentleman. "Lord St. Simon," said he "allow me to introduce you to Mr. and Mrs. Francis Hay Moulton.
At the sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from his seat and stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrust into the breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity.
The lady had taken a quick step forward and had held out her hand to him, but he still refused to raise his eyes.
It was as well for his resolution, perhaps, for her pleading face was one which it was hard to resist.
Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave the room while you explain this matter?
"If I may give an opinion," remarked the strange gentleman, "we've had just a little too much secrecy over this business already.
For my part, I should like all Europe and America to hear the rights of it." He was a small, wiry, sunburnt man, clean-shaven, with a sharp face and alert manner.
When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, and had always been his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to get a few things packed and my ulster ready.
I know I ought to have spoken to Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before his mother and all those great people.
I just made up my mind to run away and explain afterwards. I hadn't been at the table ten minutes before I saw Frank out of the window at the other side of the road.
He beckoned to me and then began walking into the Park. I slipped out, put on my things, and followed him.
We got into a cab together, and away we drove to some lodgings he had taken in Gordon Square, and that was my true wedding after all those years of waiting.
Frank had been a prisoner among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to 'Frisco, found that I had given him up for dead and had gone to England, followed me there, and had come upon me at last on the very morning of my second wedding.
"I saw it in a paper," explained the American. "It gave the name and the church but not where the lady lived."
It was awful to me to think of all those lords and ladies sitting round that breakfast-table and waiting for me to come back.
So Frank took my wedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them, so that I should not be traced, and dropped them away somewhere where no one could find them.
Then he offered to give us a chance of talking to Lord St. Simon alone, and so we came right away round to his rooms at once.
Now, Robert, you have heard it all, and I am very sorry if I have given you pain, and I hope that you do not think very meanly of me.
Lord St. Simon had by no means relaxed his rigid attitude, but had listened with a frowning brow and a compressed lip to this long narrative.
"Excuse me," he said, "but it is not my custom to discuss my most intimate personal affairs in this public manner."
"Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure." He put out his hand and coldly grasped that which she extended to him.
"I think that there you ask a little too much," responded his Lordship. "I may be forced to acquiesce in these recent developments, but I can hardly be expected to make merry over them.
I think that with your permission I will now wish you all a very good-night." He included us all in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room.
"Then I trust that you at least will honour me with your company," said Sherlock Holmes. "It is always a joy to meet an American, Mr. Moulton, for I am one of those who believe that the folly of a monarch and the blundering of a minister in far-gone years will not prevent our children from being some day citizens of the same world-wide country under a flag which shall be a quartering of the Union Jack with the Stars and Stripes."
Nothing could be more natural than the sequence of events as narrated by this lady, and nothing stranger than the result when viewed, for instance, by Mr. Lestrade of Scotland Yard.
Obviously something had occurred during the morning, then, to cause her to change her mind. What could that something be?
She could not have spoken to anyone when she was out, for she had been in the company of the bridegroom.
You see we have already arrived, by a process of exclusion, at the idea that she might have seen an American.
Then who could this American be, and why should he possess so much influence over her? It might be a lover; it might be a husband.
Her young womanhood had, I knew, been spent in rough scenes and under strange conditions. So far I had got before I ever heard Lord St. Simon's narrative.
She had gone off with a man, and the man was either a lover or was a previous husband-the chances being in favour of the latter.
It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held information in his hands the value of which he did not himself know.
The initials were, of course, of the highest importance, but more valuable still was it to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of the most select London hotels.
By the select prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence for a glass of sherry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels.
"Ah, Watson," said Holmes, smiling, "perhaps you would not be very gracious either, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wedding, you found yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of fortune.
I think that we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our stars that we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position.
Draw your chair up and hand me my violin, for the only problem we have still to solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings.
"Holmes," said I as I stood one morning in our bow-window looking down the street, "here is a madman coming along.
My friend rose lazily from his armchair and stood with his hands in the pockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder.
It was a bright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day before still lay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun.
Down the centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumbly band by the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges of the footpaths it still lay as white as when it fell.
The grey pavement had been cleaned and scraped, but was still dangerously slippery, so that there were fewer passengers than usual.
Indeed, from the direction of the Metropolitan Station no one was coming save the single gentleman whose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.
He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and imposing, with a massive, strongly marked face and a commanding figure.
He was dressed in a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shining hat, neat brown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers.
As he ran he jerked his hands up and down, waggled his head, and writhed his face into the most extraordinary contortions.
"What on earth can be the matter with him?" I asked. "He is looking up at the numbers of the houses."
Yes; I rather think he is coming to consult me professionally. I think that I recognise the symptoms.
Ha! did I not tell you?" As he spoke, the man, puffing and blowing, rushed at our door and pulled at our bell until the whole house resounded with the clanging.
A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, still gesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief and despair in his eyes that our smiles were turned in an instant to horror and pity.
For a while he could not get his words out, but swayed his body and plucked at his hair like one who has been driven to the extreme limits of his reason.
Then, suddenly springing to his feet, he beat his head against the wall with such force that we both rushed upon him and tore him away to the centre of the room.
Sherlock Holmes pushed him down into the easy-chair and, sitting beside him, patted his hand and chatted with him in the easy, soothing tones which he knew so well how to employ.
"You have come to me to tell your story, have you not?" said he. "You are fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recovered yourself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any little problem which you may submit to me."
The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fighting against his emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his brow, set his lips tight, and turned his face towards us.
God knows I have!-a trouble which is enough to unseat my reason, so sudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced, although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain.
Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two coming together, and in so frightful a form, have been enough to shake my very soul.
Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land may suffer unless some way be found out of this horrible affair.
"Pray compose yourself, sir," said Holmes, "and let me have a clear account of who you are and what it is that has befallen you."
The name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the senior partner in the second largest private banking concern in the City of London.
What could have happened, then, to bring one of the foremost citizens of London to this most pitiable pass?
I am endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may have any bearing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me upon any point which I do not make clear.
'Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it,' he answered, turning away from me with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for any words of mine to influence him.
This morning he was removed to a cell, and I, after going through all the police formalities, have hurried round to you to implore you to use your skill in unravelling the matter.
The police have openly confessed that they can at present make nothing of it. You may go to any expense which you think necessary.
I have already offered a reward of £ 1000. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honour, my gems, and my son in one night.
He put a hand on either side of his head and rocked himself to and fro, droning to himself like a child whose grief has got beyond words.
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes, with his brows knitted and his eyes fixed upon the fire.
None save my partner with his family and an occasional friend of Arthur's. Sir George Burnwell has been several times lately.
God bless you! You are doing what you can for him and for me. But it is too heavy a task. What was he doing there at all?
Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? His silence appears to me to cut both ways.
There are several singular points about the case. What did the police think of the noise which awoke you from your sleep?
A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so as to wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance of these gems?
"Now, my dear sir," said Holmes, "is it not obvious to you now that this matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or the police were at first inclined to think?
It appeared to you to be a simple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what is involved by your theory.
"But what other is there?" cried the banker with a gesture of despair. "If his motives were innocent, why does he not explain them?"
"It is our task to find that out," replied Holmes; "so now, if you please, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together, and devote an hour to glancing a little more closely into details."
My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition, which I was eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy were deeply stirred by the story to which we had listened.
He hardly spoke a word the whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with his chin upon his breast and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deepest thought.
Our client appeared to have taken fresh heart at the little glimpse of hope which had been presented to him, and he even broke into a desultory chat with me over his business affairs.
A short railway journey and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, the modest residence of the great financier.
On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which led into a narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from the road to the kitchen door, and forming the tradesmen's entrance.
On the left ran a lane which led to the stables, and was not itself within the grounds at all, being a public, though little used, thoroughfare.
Holmes left us standing at the door and walked slowly all round the house, across the front, down the tradesmen's path, and so round by the garden behind into the stable lane.
So long was he that Mr. Holder and I went into the dining-room and waited by the fire until he should return.
I do not think that I have ever seen such deadly paleness in a woman's face. Her lips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying.
Disregarding my presence, she went straight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with a sweet womanly caress.
But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what woman's instincts are. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be sorry for having acted so harshly.
Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take my word for it that he is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more.
I shall never let it drop until the gems are found-never, Mary! Your affection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to me.
Far from hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman down from London to inquire more deeply into it.
"The stable lane?" She raised her dark eyebrows. "What can he hope to find there? Ah! this, I suppose, is he.
I trust, sir, that you will succeed in proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousin Arthur is innocent of this crime.
"I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with you, that we may prove it," returned Holmes, going back to the mat to knock the snow from his shoes.
You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think that you remarked to your uncle last night that she had been out to see him?
Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing-room, and who may have heard uncle's remarks about the coronet.
I see. You infer that she may have gone out to tell her sweetheart, and that the two may have planned the robbery.
"But what is the good of all these vague theories," cried the banker impatiently, "when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronet in his hands?"
Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl, Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door, I presume?
Yes; when I went to see if the door was fastened for the night I met her slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom.
"He stood," said Holmes, "to the left of the door-that is to say, farther up the path than is necessary to reach the door?"
Something like fear sprang up in the young lady's expressive black eyes. "Why, you are like a magician," said she.
"I should be very glad now to go upstairs," said he. "I shall probably wish to go over the outside of the house again.
He walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at the large one which looked from the hall onto the stable lane.
This he opened and made a very careful examination of the sill with his powerful magnifying lens. "Now we shall go upstairs," said he at last.
The banker's dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber, with a grey carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror.
"It is a noiseless lock," said he. "It is no wonder that it did not wake you. This case, I presume, contains the coronet.
"Now, Mr. Holder," said Holmes, "here is the corner which corresponds to that which has been so unfortunately lost.
An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think would happen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise like a pistol shot.
Do you tell me that all this happened within a few yards of your bed and that you heard nothing of it?
Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with extraordinary luck during this inquiry, and it will be entirely our own fault if we do not succeed in clearing the matter up.
He went alone, at his own request, for he explained that any unnecessary footmarks might make his task more difficult.
For an hour or more he was at work, returning at last with his feet heavy with snow and his features as inscrutable as ever.
"I think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder," said he; "I can serve you best by returning to my rooms."
The banker wrung his hands. "I shall never see them again!" he cried. "And my son? You give me hopes?"
If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow morning between nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make it clearer.
I understand that you give me _carte blanche_ to act for you, provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limit on the sum I may draw.
Very good. I shall look into the matter between this and then. Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come over here again before evening.
It was obvious to me that my companion's mind was now made up about the case, although what his conclusions were was more than I could even dimly imagine.
Several times during our homeward journey I endeavoured to sound him upon the point, but he always glided away to some other topic, until at last I gave it over in despair.
It was not yet three when we found ourselves in our rooms once more. He hurried to his chamber and was down again in a few minutes dressed as a common loafer.
With his collar turned up, his shiny, seedy coat, his red cravat, and his worn boots, he was a perfect sample of the class.
"I think that this should do," said he, glancing into the glass above the fireplace. "I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, but I fear that it won't do.
I may be on the trail in this matter, or I may be following a will-o'-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which it is.
I hope that I may be back in a few hours." He cut a slice of beef from the joint upon the sideboard, sandwiched it between two rounds of bread, and thrusting this rude meal into his pocket he started off upon his expedition.
I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in excellent spirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand.
Oh, to the other side of the West End. It may be some time before I get back. Don't wait up for me in case I should be late.
Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streatham since I saw you last, but I did not call at the house.
It is a very sweet little problem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal. However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get these disreputable clothes off and return to my highly respectable self.
I could see by his manner that he had stronger reasons for satisfaction than his words alone would imply.
His eyes twinkled, and there was even a touch of colour upon his sallow cheeks. He hastened upstairs, and a few minutes later I heard the slam of the hall door, which told me that he was off once more upon his congenial hunt.
I do not know at what hour he came in, but when I came down to breakfast in the morning there he was with a cup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the other, as fresh and trim as possible.
"You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson," said he, "but you remember that our client has rather an early appointment this morning."
"Why, it is after nine now," I answered. "I should not be surprised if that were he. I thought I heard a ring."
He entered with a weariness and lethargy which was even more painful than his violence of the morning before, and he dropped heavily into the armchair which I pushed forward for him.
"I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried," said he. "Only two days ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a care in the world.
Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age. One sorrow comes close upon the heels of another. My niece, Mary, has deserted me.
No, no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best possible solution. I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are nearing the end of your troubles.
Ha! You say so! You have heard something, Mr. Holmes; you have learned something! Where are the gems?
That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. And there is a little reward, I fancy.
With a dazed face the banker made out the required check. Holmes walked over to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of gold with three gems in it, and threw it down upon the table.
The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and he hugged his recovered gems to his bosom.
No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to that noble lad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as I should be proud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have one.
It is unfortunately more than possible; it is certain. Neither you nor your son knew the true character of this man when you admitted him into your family circle.
He is one of the most dangerous men in England-a ruined gambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a man without heart or conscience.
Your niece knew nothing of such men. When he breathed his vows to her, as he had done to a hundred before her, she flattered herself that she alone had touched his heart.
The devil knows best what he said, but at least she became his tool and was in the habit of seeing him nearly every evening.
As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action without a horrible exposure of the woman whom he loved.
But the instant that she was gone he realised how crushing a misfortune this would be for you, and how all-important it was to set it right.
He rushed down, just as he was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out into the snow, and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure in the moonlight.
Sir George Burnwell tried to get away, but Arthur caught him, and there was a struggle between them, your lad tugging at one side of the coronet, and his opponent at the other.
In the scuffle, your son struck Sir George and cut him over the eye. Then something suddenly snapped, and your son, finding that he had the coronet in his hands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to your room, and had just observed that the coronet had been twisted in the struggle and was endeavouring to straighten it when you appeared upon the scene.
You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when he felt that he had deserved your warmest thanks.
He could not explain the true state of affairs without betraying one who certainly deserved little enough consideration at his hands.
"And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet," cried Mr. Holder. "Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been!
And his asking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fellow wanted to see if the missing piece were at the scene of the struggle.
I went and saw him. At first, of course, he denied everything. But when I gave him every particular that had occurred, he tried to bluster and took down a life-preserver from the wall.
I knew my man, however, and I clapped a pistol to his head before he could strike. Then he became a little more reasonable.
I told him that we would give him a price for the stones he held-£ 1000 apiece. That brought out the first signs of grief that he had shown.
'Why, dash it all!' said he, 'I've let them go at six hundred for the three!' I soon managed to get the address of the receiver who had them, on promising him that there would be no prosecution.
Off I set to him, and after much chaffering I got our stones at £ 1000 apiece. Then I looked in upon your son, told him that all was right, and eventually got to my bed about two o'clock, after what I may call a really hard day's work.
"A day which has saved England from a great public scandal," said the banker, rising. "Sir, I cannot find words to thank you, but you shall not find me ungrateful for what you have done.
Your skill has indeed exceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly to my dear boy to apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him.
As to what you tell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not even your skill can inform me where she is now.
"I think that we may safely say," returned Holmes, "that she is wherever Sir George Burnwell is. It is equally certain, too, that whatever her sins are, they will soon receive a more than sufficient punishment."
"And yet," said I, smiling, "I cannot quite hold myself absolved from the charge of sensationalism which has been urged against my records."
"You have erred, perhaps," he observed, taking up a glowing cinder with the tongs and lighting with it the long cherry-wood pipe which was wont to replace his clay when he was in a disputatious rather than a meditative mood-"you have erred perhaps in attempting to put colour and life into each of your statements instead of confining yourself to the task of placing upon record that severe reasoning from cause to effect which is really the only notable feature about the thing."
"It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter," I remarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism which I had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my friend's singular character.
"No, it is not selfishness or conceit," said he, answering, as was his wont, my thoughts rather than my words.
If I claim full justice for my art, it is because it is an impersonal thing-a thing beyond myself. Crime is common.
Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the logic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell. You have degraded what should have been a course of lectures into a series of tales.
It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after breakfast on either side of a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street.
A thick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-coloured houses, and the opposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through the heavy yellow wreaths.
Our gas was lit and shone on the white cloth and glimmer of china and metal, for the table had not been cleared yet.
Sherlock Holmes had been silent all the morning, dipping continuously into the advertisement columns of a succession of papers until at last, having apparently given up his search, he had emerged in no very sweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.
But, indeed, if you are trivial, I cannot blame you, for the days of the great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man, has lost all enterprise and originality.
As to my own little practice, it seems to be degenerating into an agency for recovering lost lead pencils and giving advice to young ladies from boarding-schools.
I think that I have touched bottom at last, however. This note I had this morning marks my zero-point, I fancy.
It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You remember that the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere whim at first, developed into a serious investigation.
Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, for here, unless I am much mistaken, is the person in question.
As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room. She was plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckled like a plover's egg, and with the brisk manner of a woman who has had her own way to make in the world.
"You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure," said she, as my companion rose to greet her, "but I have had a very strange experience, and as I have no parents or relations of any sort from whom I could ask advice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind enough to tell me what I should do."
I could see that Holmes was favourably impressed by the manner and speech of his new client. He looked her over in his searching fashion, and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and his finger-tips together, to listen to her story.
That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my mind is made up that I will accept it.
I thought, however, that before taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter to your consideration.
Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr. Rucastle seemed to be a very kind, good-natured man.
Is it not possible that his wife is a lunatic, that he desires to keep the matter quiet for fear she should be taken to an asylum, and that he humours her fancies in every way in order to prevent an outbreak?
That is a possible solution-in fact, as matters stand, it is the most probable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice household for a young lady.
Well, yes, of course the pay is good-too good. That is what makes me uneasy. Why should they give you £ 120 a year, when they could have their pick for £ 40?
I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understand afterwards if I wanted your help.
Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that your little problem promises to be the most interesting which has come my way for some months.
There is something distinctly novel about some of the features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger-
Holmes shook his head gravely. "It would cease to be a danger if we could define it," said he. "But at any time, day or night, a telegram would bring me down to your help."
"That is enough." She rose briskly from her chair with the anxiety all swept from her face. "I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy in my mind now.
I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poor hair to-night, and start for Winchester to-morrow.
"At least," said I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending the stairs, "she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to take care of herself."
"And she would need to be," said Holmes gravely. "I am much mistaken if we do not hear from her before many days are past."
As to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently for half an hour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but he swept the matter away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it.
"Data! data! data!" he cried impatiently. "I can't make bricks without clay." And yet he would always wind up by muttering that no sister of his should ever have accepted such a situation.
"There is a train at half-past nine," said I, glancing over my Bradshaw. "It is due at Winchester at 11:30."
That will do very nicely. Then perhaps I had better postpone my analysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at our best in the morning.
It was an ideal spring day, a light blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds drifting across from west to east.
The sun was shining very brightly, and yet there was an exhilarating nip in the air, which set an edge to a man's energy.
All over the countryside, away to the rolling hills around Aldershot, the little red and grey roofs of the farm-steadings peeped out from amid the light green of the new foliage.
"Are they not fresh and beautiful?" I cried with all the enthusiasm of a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.
"Do you know, Watson," said he, "that it is one of the curses of a mind with a turn like mine that I must look at everything with reference to my own special subject.
You look at these scattered houses, and you are impressed by their beauty. I look at them, and the only thought which comes to me is a feeling of their isolation and of the impunity with which crime may be committed there.
They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson, founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in London do not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the smiling and beautiful countryside.
But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of public opinion can do in the town what the law cannot accomplish.
But look at these lonely houses, each in its own fields, filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know little of the law.
Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden wickedness which may go on, year in, year out, in such places, and none the wiser.
Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to live in Winchester, I should never have had a fear for her.
It is the five miles of country which makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she is not personally threatened.
I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would cover the facts as far as we know them.
But which of these is correct can only be determined by the fresh information which we shall no doubt find waiting for us.
The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no distance from the station, and there we found the young lady waiting for us.
"I am so delighted that you have come," she said earnestly. "It is so very kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do.
I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastle to be back before three. I got his leave to come into town this morning, though he little knew for what purpose.
"Let us have everything in its due order." Holmes thrust his long thin legs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.
In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with no actual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle.
It is only fair to them to say that. But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy in my mind about them.
Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as in feature. She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse.
She was a nonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted both to her husband and to her little son.
Her light grey eyes wandered continually from one to the other, noting every little want and forestalling it if possible.
He was kind to her also in his bluff, boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy couple.
And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She would often be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face.
He is small for his age, with a head which is quite disproportionately large. His whole life appears to be spent in an alternation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals of sulking.
Giving pain to any creature weaker than himself seems to be his one idea of amusement, and he shows quite remarkable talent in planning the capture of mice, little birds, and insects.
But I would rather not talk about the creature, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has little to do with my story.
I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down the blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat again in the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man in the road.
I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that I must have rushed past him into my room.
I remember nothing until I found myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of you, Mr. Holmes.
I could not live there longer without some advice. I was frightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the servants, even of the child.
They were all horrible to me. If I could only bring you down all would be well. Of course I might have fled from the house, but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears.
My mind was soon made up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went down to the office, which is about half a mile from the house, and then returned, feeling very much easier.
Now I have told you all my adventures, Mr. Holmes, and I should be very glad if you could tell me what it all means, and, above all, what I should do.
Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story. My friend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in his pockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon his face.
You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a very brave and sensible girl, Miss Hunter.
Do you think that you could perform one more feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think you a quite exceptional woman.
We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven o'clock, my friend and I. The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, be incapable.
There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm. If you could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turn the key upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely.
Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of course there is only one feasible explanation.
You have been brought there to personate someone, and the real person is imprisoned in this chamber. That is obvious.
As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt that it is the daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right, who was said to have gone to America.
The dog is let loose at night to prevent him from endeavouring to communicate with her. So much is fairly clear.
My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light as to the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents.
Don't you see that the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gained my first real insight into the character of parents by studying their children.
This child's disposition is abnormally cruel, merely for cruelty's sake, and whether he derives this from his smiling father, as I should suspect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poor girl who is in their power.
"I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes," cried our client. "A thousand things come back to me which make me certain that you have hit it.
We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man. We can do nothing until seven o'clock.
We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reached the Copper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wayside public-house.
The group of trees, with their dark leaves shining like burnished metal in the light of the setting sun, were sufficient to mark the house even had Miss Hunter not been standing smiling on the door-step.
A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. "That is Mrs. Toller in the cellar," said she. "Her husband lies snoring on the kitchen rug.
"You have done well indeed!" cried Holmes with enthusiasm. "Now lead the way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business."
We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down a passage, and found ourselves in front of the barricade which Miss Hunter had described.
Holmes cut the cord and removed the transverse bar. Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but without success.
"I trust that we are not too late," said he. "I think, Miss Hunter, that we had better go in without you.
It was an old rickety door and gave at once before our united strength. Together we rushed into the room.
It was empty. There was no furniture save a little pallet bed, a small table, and a basketful of linen.
"There has been some villainy here," said Holmes; "this beauty has guessed Miss Hunter's intentions and has carried his victim off."
"Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it." He swung himself up onto the roof. "Ah, yes," he cried, "here's the end of a long light ladder against the eaves.
He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever and dangerous man. I should not be very much surprised if this were he whose step I hear now upon the stair.
The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at the door of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in his hand.
Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sight of him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and confronted him.
"It is for me to ask you that," he shrieked, "you thieves! Spies and thieves! I have caught you, have I?
You are in my power. I'll serve you!" He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.
"My God!" he cried. "Someone has loosed the dog. It's not been fed for two days. Quick, quick, or it'll be too late!"
Running up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over with its keen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of his neck.
Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went up to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn't let me know what you were planning, for I would have told you that your pains were wasted.
"Ha!" said Holmes, looking keenly at her. "It is clear that Mrs. Toller knows more about this matter than anyone else."
Then, pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are several points on which I must confess that I am still in the dark.
As well as I could learn, Miss Alice had rights of her own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she was, that she never said a word about them but just left everything in Mr. Rucastle's hands.
He knew he was safe with her; but when there was a chance of a husband coming forward, who would ask for all that the law would give him, then her father thought it time to put a stop on it.
Then she got better at last, all worn to a shadow, and with her beautiful hair cut off; but that didn't make no change in her young man, and he stuck to her as true as man could be.
"Ah," said Holmes, "I think that what you have been good enough to tell us makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce all that remains.
And brought Miss Hunter down from London in order to get rid of the disagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler.
But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be, blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by certain arguments, metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that your interests were the same as his.
And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want of drink, and that a ladder should be ready at the moment when your master had gone out.
"I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller," said Holmes, "for you have certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us.
And here comes the country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we had best escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me that our _locus standi_ now is rather a questionable one.
They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much of Rucastle's past life that he finds it difficult to part from them.
Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, in Southampton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of a government appointment in the island of Mauritius.
As to Miss Violet Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested no further interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of one of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at Walsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.
In the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of the University of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through the course prescribed for surgeons in the army.
Having completed my studies there, I was duly attached to the Fifth Northumberland Fusiliers as Assistant Surgeon.
The regiment was stationed in India at the time, and before I could join it, the second Afghan war had broken out.
On landing at Bombay, I learned that my corps had advanced through the passes, and was already deep in the enemy's country.
I followed, however, with many other officers who were in the same situation as myself, and succeeded in reaching Candahar in safety, where I found my regiment, and at once entered upon my new duties.
The campaign brought honours and promotion to many, but for me it had nothing but misfortune and disaster.
I was removed from my brigade and attached to the Berkshires, with whom I served at the fatal battle of Maiwand.
There I was struck on the shoulder by a Jezail bullet, which shattered the bone and grazed the subclavian artery.
I should have fallen into the hands of the murderous Ghazis had it not been for the devotion and courage shown by Murray, my orderly, who threw me across a pack-horse, and succeeded in bringing me safely to the British lines.
Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I had undergone, I was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, to the base hospital at Peshawar.
I was dispatched, accordingly, in the troopship "Orontes," and landed a month later on Portsmouth jetty, with my health irretrievably ruined, but with permission from a paternal government to spend the next nine months in attempting to improve it.
I had neither kith nor kin in England, and was therefore as free as air-or as free as an income of eleven shillings and sixpence a day will permit a man to be.
Under such circumstances, I naturally gravitated to London, that great cesspool into which all the loungers and idlers of the Empire are irresistibly drained.
There I stayed for some time at a private hotel in the Strand, leading a comfortless, meaningless existence, and spending such money as I had, considerably more freely than I ought.
Choosing the latter alternative, I began by making up my mind to leave the hotel, and to take up my quarters in some less pretentious and less expensive domicile.
The sight of a friendly face in the great wilderness of London is a pleasant thing indeed to a lonely man.
In old days Stamford had never been a particular crony of mine, but now I hailed him with enthusiasm, and he, in his turn, appeared to be delighted to see me.
In the exuberance of my joy, I asked him to lunch with me at the Holborn, and we started off together in a hansom.
"Whatever have you been doing with yourself, Watson?" he asked in undisguised wonder, as we rattled through the crowded London streets.
I gave him a short sketch of my adventures, and had hardly concluded it by the time that we reached our destination.
"Poor devil!" he said, commiseratingly, after he had listened to my misfortunes. "What are you up to now?"
"Looking for lodgings," I answered. "Trying to solve the problem as to whether it is possible to get comfortable rooms at a reasonable price."
"That's a strange thing," remarked my companion; "you are the second man to-day that has used that expression to me."
A fellow who is working at the chemical laboratory up at the hospital. He was bemoaning himself this morning because he could not get someone to go halves with him in some nice rooms which he had found, and which were too much for his purse.
"By Jove!" I cried, "if he really wants someone to share the rooms and the expense, I am the very man for him.
Young Stamford looked rather strangely at me over his wine-glass. "You don't know Sherlock Holmes yet," he said; "perhaps you would not care for him as a constant companion."
Oh, I didn't say there was anything against him. He is a little queer in his ideas-an enthusiast in some branches of science.
No-I have no idea what he intends to go in for. I believe he is well up in anatomy, and he is a first-class chemist; but, as far as I know, he has never taken out any systematic medical classes.
His studies are very desultory and eccentric, but he has amassed a lot of out-of-the way knowledge which would astonish his professors.
No; he is not a man that it is easy to draw out, though he can be communicative enough when the fancy seizes him.
"I should like to meet him," I said. "If I am to lodge with anyone, I should prefer a man of studious and quiet habits.
I am not strong enough yet to stand much noise or excitement. I had enough of both in Afghanistan to last me for the remainder of my natural existence.
"He is sure to be at the laboratory," returned my companion. "He either avoids the place for weeks, or else he works there from morning to night.
As we made our way to the hospital after leaving the Holborn, Stamford gave me a few more particulars about the gentleman whom I proposed to take as a fellow-lodger.
"You mustn't blame me if you don't get on with him," he said; "I know nothing more of him than I have learned from meeting him occasionally in the laboratory.
"If we don't get on it will be easy to part company," I answered. "It seems to me, Stamford," I added, looking hard at my companion, "that you have some reason for washing your hands of the matter.
"It is not easy to express the inexpressible," he answered with a laugh. "Holmes is a little too scientific for my tastes-it approaches to cold-bloodedness.
To do him justice, I think that he would take it himself with the same readiness. He appears to have a passion for definite and exact knowledge.
Yes, but it may be pushed to excess. When it comes to beating the subjects in the dissecting-rooms with a stick, it is certainly taking rather a bizarre shape.
No. Heaven knows what the objects of his studies are. But here we are, and you must form your own impressions about him.
As he spoke, we turned down a narrow lane and passed through a small side-door, which opened into a wing of the great hospital.
It was familiar ground to me, and I needed no guiding as we ascended the bleak stone staircase and made our way down the long corridor with its vista of whitewashed wall and dun-coloured doors.
There was only one student in the room, who was bending over a distant table absorbed in his work. At the sound of our steps he glanced round and sprang to his feet with a cry of pleasure.
"I've found it! I've found it," he shouted to my companion, running towards us with a test-tube in his hand.
"How are you?" he said cordially, gripping my hand with a strength for which I should hardly have given him credit.
Why, man, it is the most practical medico-legal discovery for years. Don't you see that it gives us an infallible test for blood stains.
Come over here now!" He seized me by the coat-sleeve in his eagerness, and drew me over to the table at which he had been working.
"Let us have some fresh blood," he said, digging a long bodkin into his finger, and drawing off the resulting drop of blood in a chemical pipette.
Now, I add this small quantity of blood to a litre of water. You perceive that the resulting mixture has the appearance of pure water.
The proportion of blood cannot be more than one in a million. I have no doubt, however, that we shall be able to obtain the characteristic reaction.
As he spoke, he threw into the vessel a few white crystals, and then added some drops of a transparent fluid.
In an instant the contents assumed a dull mahogany colour, and a brownish dust was precipitated to the bottom of the glass jar.
"Ha! ha!" he cried, clapping his hands, and looking as delighted as a child with a new toy. "What do you think of that?"
Beautiful! beautiful! The old Guiacum test was very clumsy and uncertain. So is the microscopic examination for blood corpuscles.
The latter is valueless if the stains are a few hours old. Now, this appears to act as well whether the blood is old or new.
Had this test been invented, there are hundreds of men now walking the earth who would long ago have paid the penalty of their crimes.
Criminal cases are continually hinging upon that one point. A man is suspected of a crime months perhaps after it has been committed.
His linen or clothes are examined, and brownish stains discovered upon them. Are they blood stains, or mud stains, or rust stains, or fruit stains, or what are they?
That is a question which has puzzled many an expert, and why? Because there was no reliable test. Now we have the Sherlock Holmes' test, and there will no longer be any difficulty.
His eyes fairly glittered as he spoke, and he put his hand over his heart and bowed as if to some applauding crowd conjured up by his imagination.
There was the case of Von Bischoff at Frankfort last year. He would certainly have been hung had this test been in existence.
Then there was Mason of Bradford, and the notorious Muller, and Lefevre of Montpellier, and Samson of New Orleans.
"You seem to be a walking calendar of crime," said Stamford with a laugh. "You might start a paper on those lines.
"Very interesting reading it might be made, too," remarked Sherlock Holmes, sticking a small piece of plaster over the prick on his finger.
"I have to be careful," he continued, turning to me with a smile, "for I dabble with poisons a good deal."
He held out his hand as he spoke, and I noticed that it was all mottled over with similar pieces of plaster, and discoloured with strong acids.
"We came here on business," said Stamford, sitting down on a high three-legged stool, and pushing another one in my direction with his foot.
My friend here wants to take diggings, and as you were complaining that you could get no one to go halves with you, I thought that I had better bring you together.
Sherlock Holmes seemed delighted at the idea of sharing his rooms with me. "I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street," he said, "which would suit us down to the ground.
That's good enough. I generally have chemicals about, and occasionally do experiments. Would that annoy you?
Let me see-what are my other shortcomings. I get in the dumps at times, and don't open my mouth for days on end.
You must not think I am sulky when I do that. Just let me alone, and I'll soon be right. What have you to confess now?
It's just as well for two fellows to know the worst of one another before they begin to live together.
I laughed at this cross-examination. "I keep a bull pup," I said, "and I object to rows because my nerves are shaken, and I get up at all sorts of ungodly hours, and I am extremely lazy.
"It depends on the player," I answered. "A well-played violin is a treat for the gods-a badly-played one--"
"Oh, that's all right," he cried, with a merry laugh. "I think we may consider the thing as settled-that is, if the rooms are agreeable to you."
"By the way," I asked suddenly, stopping and turning upon Stamford, "how the deuce did he know that I had come from Afghanistan?"
My companion smiled an enigmatical smile. "That's just his little peculiarity," he said. "A good many people have wanted to know how he finds things out."
"Oh! a mystery is it?" I cried, rubbing my hands. "This is very piquant. I am much obliged to you for bringing us together.
"You must study him, then," Stamford said, as he bade me good-bye. "You'll find him a knotty problem, though.
We met next day as he had arranged, and inspected the rooms at No. 221B, Baker Street, of which he had spoken at our meeting.
They consisted of a couple of comfortable bed-rooms and a single large airy sitting-room, cheerfully furnished, and illuminated by two broad windows.
So desirable in every way were the apartments, and so moderate did the terms seem when divided between us, that the bargain was concluded upon the spot, and we at once entered into possession.
That very evening I moved my things round from the hotel, and on the following morning Sherlock Holmes followed me with several boxes and portmanteaus.
For a day or two we were busily employed in unpacking and laying out our property to the best advantage.
Holmes was certainly not a difficult man to live with. He was quiet in his ways, and his habits were regular.
It was rare for him to be up after ten at night, and he had invariably breakfasted and gone out before I rose in the morning.
Sometimes he spent his day at the chemical laboratory, sometimes in the dissecting-rooms, and occasionally in long walks, which appeared to take him into the lowest portions of the City.
On these occasions I have noticed such a dreamy, vacant expression in his eyes, that I might have suspected him of being addicted to the use of some narcotic, had not the temperance and cleanliness of his whole life forbidden such a notion.
As the weeks went by, my interest in him and my curiosity as to his aims in life, gradually deepened and increased.
His eyes were sharp and piercing, save during those intervals of torpor to which I have alluded; and his thin, hawk-like nose gave his whole expression an air of alertness and decision.
His chin, too, had the prominence and squareness which mark the man of determination. His hands were invariably blotted with ink and stained with chemicals, yet he was possessed of extraordinary delicacy of touch, as I frequently had occasion to observe when I watched him manipulating his fragile philosophical instruments.
Before pronouncing judgment, however, be it remembered, how objectless was my life, and how little there was to engage my attention.
My health forbade me from venturing out unless the weather was exceptionally genial, and I had no friends who would call upon me and break the monotony of my daily existence.
Under these circumstances, I eagerly hailed the little mystery which hung around my companion, and spent much of my time in endeavouring to unravel it.
He was not studying medicine. He had himself, in reply to a question, confirmed Stamford's opinion upon that point.
Neither did he appear to have pursued any course of reading which might fit him for a degree in science or any other recognized portal which would give him an entrance into the learned world.
Yet his zeal for certain studies was remarkable, and within eccentric limits his knowledge was so extraordinarily ample and minute that his observations have fairly astounded me.
Surely no man would work so hard or attain such precise information unless he had some definite end in view.
Desultory readers are seldom remarkable for the exactness of their learning. No man burdens his mind with small matters unless he has some very good reason for doing so.
His ignorance was as remarkable as his knowledge. Of contemporary literature, philosophy and politics he appeared to know next to nothing.
That any civilized human being in this nineteenth century should not be aware that the earth travelled round the sun appeared to be to me such an extraordinary fact that I could hardly realize it.
"You appear to be astonished," he said, smiling at my expression of surprise. "Now that I do know it I shall do my best to forget it."
"You see," he explained, "I consider that a man's brain originally is like a little empty attic, and you have to stock it with such furniture as you choose.
"What the deuce is it to me?" he interrupted impatiently; "you say that we go round the sun. If we went round the moon it would not make a pennyworth of difference to me or to my work."
I was on the point of asking him what that work might be, but something in his manner showed me that the question would be an unwelcome one.
I pondered over our short conversation, however, and endeavoured to draw my deductions from it. He said that he would acquire no knowledge which did not bear upon his object.
I even took a pencil and jotted them down. I could not help smiling at the document when I had completed it.
Well up in belladonna, opium, and poisons generally. Knows nothing of practical gardening. 6. Geology.-Practical, but limited.
Tells at a glance different soils from each other. After walks has shown me splashes upon his trousers, and told me by their colour and consistence in what part of London he had received them.
When I had got so far in my list I threw it into the fire in despair. "If I can only find what the fellow is driving at by reconciling all these accomplishments, and discovering a calling which needs them all," I said to myself, "I may as well give up the attempt at once."
I see that I have alluded above to his powers upon the violin. These were very remarkable, but as eccentric as all his other accomplishments.
That he could play pieces, and difficult pieces, I knew well, because at my request he has played me some of Mendelssohn's Lieder, and other favourites.
I might have rebelled against these exasperating solos had it not been that he usually terminated them by playing in quick succession a whole series of my favourite airs as a slight compensation for the trial upon my patience.
During the first week or so we had no callers, and I had begun to think that my companion was as friendless a man as I was myself.
Presently, however, I found that he had many acquaintances, and those in the most different classes of society.
There was one little sallow rat-faced, dark-eyed fellow who was introduced to me as Mr. Lestrade, and who came three or four times in a single week.
On another occasion an old white-haired gentleman had an interview with my companion; and on another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform.
When any of these nondescript individuals put in an appearance, Sherlock Holmes used to beg for the use of the sitting-room, and I would retire to my bed-room.
He always apologized to me for putting me to this inconvenience. "I have to use this room as a place of business," he said, "and these people are my clients."
Again I had an opportunity of asking him a point blank question, and again my delicacy prevented me from forcing another man to confide in me.
I imagined at the time that he had some strong reason for not alluding to it, but he soon dispelled the idea by coming round to the subject of his own accord.
It was upon the 4th of March, as I have good reason to remember, that I rose somewhat earlier than usual, and found that Sherlock Holmes had not yet finished his breakfast.
The landlady had become so accustomed to my late habits that my place had not been laid nor my coffee prepared.
With the unreasonable petulance of mankind I rang the bell and gave a curt intimation that I was ready.
Then I picked up a magazine from the table and attempted to while away the time with it, while my companion munched silently at his toast.
One of the articles had a pencil mark at the heading, and I naturally began to run my eye through it.
Its somewhat ambitious title was "The Book of Life," and it attempted to show how much an observant man might learn by an accurate and systematic examination of all that came in his way.
It struck me as being a remarkable mixture of shrewdness and of absurdity. The reasoning was close and intense, but the deductions appeared to me to be far-fetched and exaggerated.
The writer claimed by a momentary expression, a twitch of a muscle or a glance of an eye, to fathom a man's inmost thoughts.
Deceit, according to him, was an impossibility in the case of one trained to observation and analysis.
His conclusions were as infallible as so many propositions of Euclid. So startling would his results appear to the uninitiated that until they learned the processes by which he had arrived at them they might well consider him as a necromancer.
"From a drop of water," said the writer, "a logician could infer the possibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or heard of one or the other.
So all life is a great chain, the nature of which is known whenever we are shown a single link of it.
Before turning to those moral and mental aspects of the matter which present the greatest difficulties, let the enquirer begin by mastering more elementary problems.
Let him, on meeting a fellow-mortal, learn at a glance to distinguish the history of the man, and the trade or profession to which he belongs.
Puerile as such an exercise may seem, it sharpens the faculties of observation, and teaches one where to look and what to look for.
That all united should fail to enlighten the competent enquirer in any case is almost inconceivable.
"What ineffable twaddle!" I cried, slapping the magazine down on the table, "I never read such rubbish in my life."
"Why, this article," I said, pointing at it with my egg spoon as I sat down to my breakfast. "I see that you have read it since you have marked it.
I don't deny that it is smartly written. It irritates me though. It is evidently the theory of some arm-chair lounger who evolves all these neat little paradoxes in the seclusion of his own study.
It is not practical. I should like to see him clapped down in a third class carriage on the Underground, and asked to give the trades of all his fellow-travellers.
"You would lose your money," Sherlock Holmes remarked calmly. "As for the article I wrote it myself."
Yes, I have a turn both for observation and for deduction. The theories which I have expressed there, and which appear to you to be so chimerical are really extremely practical-so practical that I depend upon them for my bread and cheese.
Well, I have a trade of my own. I suppose I am the only one in the world. I'm a consulting detective, if you can understand what that is.
Here in London we have lots of Government detectives and lots of private ones. When these fellows are at fault they come to me, and I manage to put them on the right scent.
They lay all the evidence before me, and I am generally able, by the help of my knowledge of the history of crime, to set them straight.
There is a strong family resemblance about misdeeds, and if you have all the details of a thousand at your finger ends, it is odd if you can't unravel the thousand and first.
Lestrade is a well-known detective. He got himself into a fog recently over a forgery case, and that was what brought him here.
They are mostly sent on by private inquiry agencies. They are all people who are in trouble about something, and want a little enlightening.
"But do you mean to say," I said, "that without leaving your room you can unravel some knot which other men can make nothing of, although they have seen every detail for themselves?"
Quite so. I have a kind of intuition that way. Now and again a case turns up which is a little more complex.
Then I have to bustle about and see things with my own eyes. You see I have a lot of special knowledge which I apply to the problem, and which facilitates matters wonderfully.
Those rules of deduction laid down in that article which aroused your scorn, are invaluable to me in practical work.
Observation with me is second nature. You appeared to be surprised when I told you, on our first meeting, that you had come from Afghanistan.
There were such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran, 'Here is a gentleman of a medical type, but with the air of a military man.
Clearly an army doctor, then. He has just come from the tropics, for his face is dark, and that is not the natural tint of his skin, for his wrists are fair.
He has undergone hardship and sickness, as his haggard face says clearly. His left arm has been injured.
He holds it in a stiff and unnatural manner. Where in the tropics could an English army doctor have seen much hardship and got his arm wounded?
Clearly in Afghanistan.' The whole train of thought did not occupy a second. I then remarked that you came from Afghanistan, and you were astonished.
"It is simple enough as you explain it," I said, smiling. "You remind me of Edgar Allen Poe's Dupin. I had no idea that such individuals did exist outside of stories."
Sherlock Holmes rose and lit his pipe. "No doubt you think that you are complimenting me in comparing me to Dupin," he observed.
He had some analytical genius, no doubt; but he was by no means such a phenomenon as Poe appeared to imagine.
Sherlock Holmes sniffed sardonically. "Lecoq was a miserable bungler," he said, in an angry voice; "he had only one thing to recommend him, and that was his energy.
That book made me positively ill. The question was how to identify an unknown prisoner. I could have done it in twenty-four hours.
Lecoq took six months or so. It might be made a text-book for detectives to teach them what to avoid.
I felt rather indignant at having two characters whom I had admired treated in this cavalier style. I walked over to the window, and stood looking out into the busy street.
"There are no crimes and no criminals in these days," he said, querulously. "What is the use of having brains in our profession.
I know well that I have it in me to make my name famous. No man lives or has ever lived who has brought the same amount of study and of natural talent to the detection of crime which I have done.
And what is the result? There is no crime to detect, or, at most, some bungling villainy with a motive so transparent that even a Scotland Yard official can see through it.
"I wonder what that fellow is looking for?" I asked, pointing to a stalwart, plainly-dressed individual who was walking slowly down the other side of the street, looking anxiously at the numbers.
The thought had hardly passed through my mind when the man whom we were watching caught sight of the number on our door, and ran rapidly across the roadway.
Here was an opportunity of taking the conceit out of him. He little thought of this when he made that random shot.
I confess that I was considerably startled by this fresh proof of the practical nature of my companion's theories.
When I looked at him he had finished reading the note, and his eyes had assumed the vacant, lack-lustre expression which showed mental abstraction.
"I have no time for trifles," he answered, brusquely; then with a smile, "Excuse my rudeness. You broke the thread of my thoughts; but perhaps it is as well.
It was easier to know it than to explain why I knew it. If you were asked to prove that two and two made four, you might find some difficulty, and yet you are quite sure of the fact.
Even across the street I could see a great blue anchor tattooed on the back of the fellow's hand. That smacked of the sea.
He had a military carriage, however, and regulation side whiskers. There we have the marine. He was a man with some amount of self-importance and a certain air of command.
You must have observed the way in which he held his head and swung his cane. A steady, respectable, middle-aged man, too, on the face of him-all facts which led me to believe that he had been a sergeant.
"Commonplace," said Holmes, though I thought from his expression that he was pleased at my evident surprise and admiration.
"I said just now that there were no criminals. It appears that I am wrong-look at this!" He threw me over the note which the commissionaire had brought.
"It does seem to be a little out of the common," he remarked, calmly. "Would you mind reading it to me aloud?"
"Gregson is the smartest of the Scotland Yarders," my friend remarked; "he and Lestrade are the pick of a bad lot.
They are both quick and energetic, but conventional-shockingly so. They have their knives into one another, too.
They are as jealous as a pair of professional beauties. There will be some fun over this case if they are both put upon the scent.
I was amazed at the calm way in which he rippled on. "Surely there is not a moment to be lost," I cried, "shall I go and order you a cab?"
I'm not sure about whether I shall go. I am the most incurably lazy devil that ever stood in shoe leather-that is, when the fit is on me, for I can be spry enough at times.
My dear fellow, what does it matter to me. Supposing I unravel the whole matter, you may be sure that Gregson, Lestrade, and Co. will pocket all the credit.
Yes. He knows that I am his superior, and acknowledges it to me; but he would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any third person.
However, we may as well go and have a look. I shall work it out on my own hook. I may have a laugh at them if I have nothing else.
He hustled on his overcoat, and bustled about in a way that showed that an energetic fit had superseded the apathetic one.
"Yes, if you have nothing better to do." A minute later we were both in a hansom, driving furiously for the Brixton Road.
It was a foggy, cloudy morning, and a dun-coloured veil hung over the house-tops, looking like the reflection of the mud-coloured streets beneath.
My companion was in the best of spirits, and prattled away about Cremona fiddles, and the difference between a Stradivarius and an Amati.
As for myself, I was silent, for the dull weather and the melancholy business upon which we were engaged, depressed my spirits.
"You don't seem to give much thought to the matter in hand," I said at last, interrupting Holmes' musical disquisition.
"No data yet," he answered. "It is a capital mistake to theorize before you have all the evidence. It biases the judgment."
"You will have your data soon," I remarked, pointing with my finger; "this is the Brixton Road, and that is the house, if I am not very much mistaken."
"So it is. Stop, driver, stop!" We were still a hundred yards or so from it, but he insisted upon our alighting, and we finished our journey upon foot.
Number 3, Lauriston Gardens wore an ill-omened and minatory look. It was one of four which stood back some little way from the street, two being occupied and two empty.
The latter looked out with three tiers of vacant melancholy windows, which were blank and dreary, save that here and there a "To Let" card had developed like a cataract upon the bleared panes.
The whole place was very sloppy from the rain which had fallen through the night. The garden was bounded by a three-foot brick wall with a fringe of wood rails upon the top, and against this wall was leaning a stalwart police constable, surrounded by a small knot of loafers, who craned their necks and strained their eyes in the vain hope of catching some glimpse of the proceedings within.
I had imagined that Sherlock Holmes would at once have hurried into the house and plunged into a study of the mystery.
Having finished his scrutiny, he proceeded slowly down the path, or rather down the fringe of grass which flanked the path, keeping his eyes riveted upon the ground.
Still I had had such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of his perceptive faculties, that I had no doubt that he could see a great deal which was hidden from me.
At the door of the house we were met by a tall, white-faced, flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and wrung my companion's hand with effusion.
"Except that!" my friend answered, pointing at the pathway. "If a herd of buffaloes had passed along there could not be a greater mess.
"I have had so much to do inside the house," the detective said evasively. "My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here.
Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically. "With two such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find out," he said.
Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way. "I think we have done all that can be done," he answered; "it's a queer case though, and I knew your taste for such things."
"Then let us go and look at the room." With which inconsequent remark he strode on into the house, followed by Gregson, whose features expressed his astonishment.
A short passage, bare planked and dusty, led to the kitchen and offices. Two doors opened out of it to the left and to the right.
One of these had obviously been closed for many weeks. The other belonged to the dining-room, which was the apartment in which the mysterious affair had occurred.
Holmes walked in, and I followed him with that subdued feeling at my heart which the presence of death inspires.
Opposite the door was a showy fireplace, surmounted by a mantelpiece of imitation white marble. On one corner of this was stuck the stump of a red wax candle.
The solitary window was so dirty that the light was hazy and uncertain, giving a dull grey tinge to everything, which was intensified by the thick layer of dust which coated the whole apartment.
It was that of a man about forty-three or forty-four years of age, middle-sized, broad shouldered, with crisp curling black hair, and a short stubbly beard.
He was dressed in a heavy broadcloth frock coat and waistcoat, with light-coloured trousers, and immaculate collar and cuffs.
On his rigid face there stood an expression of horror, and as it seemed to me, of hatred, such as I have never seen upon human features.
I have seen death in many forms, but never has it appeared to me in a more fearsome aspect than in that dark grimy apartment, which looked out upon one of the main arteries of suburban London.
Lestrade, lean and ferret-like as ever, was standing by the doorway, and greeted my companion and myself.
"This case will make a stir, sir," he remarked. "It beats anything I have seen, and I am no chicken."
Sherlock Holmes approached the body, and, kneeling down, examined it intently. "You are sure that there is no wound?"
Then, of course, this blood belongs to a second individual-presumably the murderer, if murder has been committed.
It reminds me of the circumstances attendant on the death of Van Jansen, in Utrecht, in the year '34.
So swiftly was the examination made, that one would hardly have guessed the minuteness with which it was conducted.
Gregson had a stretcher and four men at hand. At his call they entered the room, and the stranger was lifted and carried out.
As they raised him, a ring tinkled down and rolled across the floor. Lestrade grabbed it up and stared at it with mystified eyes.
He held it out, as he spoke, upon the palm of his hand. We all gathered round him and gazed at it. There could be no doubt that that circlet of plain gold had once adorned the finger of a bride.
"You're sure it doesn't simplify them?" observed Holmes. "There's nothing to be learned by staring at it.
"We have it all here," said Gregson, pointing to a litter of objects upon one of the bottom steps of the stairs.
A gold watch, No. 97163, by Barraud, of London. Gold Albert chain, very heavy and solid. Gold ring, with masonic device.
Gold pin-bull-dog's head, with rubies as eyes. Russian leather card-case, with cards of Enoch J. Drebber of Cleveland, corresponding with the E. J. D. upon the linen.
No purse, but loose money to the extent of seven pounds thirteen. Pocket edition of Boccaccio's _Decameron_, with name of Joseph Stangerson upon the fly-leaf.
American Exchange, Strand-to be left till called for. They are both from the Guion Steamship Company, and refer to the sailing of their boats from Liverpool.
"I did it at once, sir," said Gregson. "I have had advertisements sent to all the newspapers, and one of my men has gone to the American Exchange, but he has not returned yet."
We simply detailed the circumstances, and said that we should be glad of any information which could help us.
Nothing else? Is there no circumstance on which this whole case appears to hinge? Will you not telegraph again?
Sherlock Holmes chuckled to himself, and appeared to be about to make some remark, when Lestrade, who had been in the front room while we were holding this conversation in the hall, reappeared upon the scene, rubbing his hands in a pompous and self-satisfied manner.
"Mr. Gregson," he said, "I have just made a discovery of the highest importance, and one which would have been overlooked had I not made a careful examination of the walls."
The little man's eyes sparkled as he spoke, and he was evidently in a state of suppressed exultation at having scored a point against his colleague.
"Come here," he said, bustling back into the room, the atmosphere of which felt clearer since the removal of its ghastly inmate.
I have remarked that the paper had fallen away in parts. In this particular corner of the room a large piece had peeled off, leaving a yellow square of coarse plastering.
The murderer has written it with his or her own blood. See this smear where it has trickled down the wall!
That disposes of the idea of suicide anyhow. Why was that corner chosen to write it on? I will tell you.
See that candle on the mantelpiece. It was lit at the time, and if it was lit this corner would be the brightest instead of the darkest portion of the wall.
Mean? Why, it means that the writer was going to put the female name Rachel, but was disturbed before he or she had time to finish.
You mark my words, when this case comes to be cleared up you will find that a woman named Rachel has something to do with it.
It's all very well for you to laugh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You may be very smart and clever, but the old hound is the best, when all is said and done.
"I really beg your pardon!" said my companion, who had ruffled the little man's temper by bursting into an explosion of laughter.
You certainly have the credit of being the first of us to find this out, and, as you say, it bears every mark of having been written by the other participant in last night's mystery.
In one place he gathered up very carefully a little pile of grey dust from the floor, and packed it away in an envelope.
Finally, he examined with his glass the word upon the wall, going over every letter of it with the most minute exactness.
"They say that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains," he remarked with a smile. "It's a very bad definition, but it does apply to detective work."
They evidently failed to appreciate the fact, which I had begun to realize, that Sherlock Holmes' smallest actions were all directed towards some definite and practical end.
"It would be robbing you of the credit of the case if I was to presume to help you," remarked my friend.
"You are doing so well now that it would be a pity for anyone to interfere." There was a world of sarcasm in his voice as he spoke.
"If you will let me know how your investigations go," he continued, "I shall be happy to give you any help I can.
In the meantime I should like to speak to the constable who found the body. Can you give me his name and address?
Lestrade glanced at his note-book. "John Rance," he said. "He is off duty now. You will find him at 46, Audley Court, Kennington Park Gate."
"Come along, Doctor," he said; "we shall go and look him up. I'll tell you one thing which may help you in the case," he continued, turning to the two detectives.
He came here with his victim in a four-wheeled cab, which was drawn by a horse with three old shoes and one new one on his off fore leg.
In all probability the murderer had a florid face, and the finger-nails of his right hand were remarkably long.
"Poison," said Sherlock Holmes curtly, and strode off. "One other thing, Lestrade," he added, turning round at the door: "'Rache,' is the German for 'revenge;' so don't lose your time looking for Miss Rachel."
It was one o'clock when we left No. 3, Lauriston Gardens. Sherlock Holmes led me to the nearest telegraph office, whence he dispatched a long telegram.
"There is nothing like first hand evidence," he remarked; "as a matter of fact, my mind is entirely made up upon the case, but still we may as well learn all that is to be learned."
"You amaze me, Holmes," said I. "Surely you are not as sure as you pretend to be of all those particulars which you gave."
"There's no room for a mistake," he answered. "The very first thing which I observed on arriving there was that a cab had made two ruts with its wheels close to the curb.
Now, up to last night, we have had no rain for a week, so that those wheels which left such a deep impression must have been there during the night.
There were the marks of the horse's hoofs, too, the outline of one of which was far more clearly cut than that of the other three, showing that that was a new shoe.
Since the cab was there after the rain began, and was not there at any time during the morning-I have Gregson's word for that-it follows that it must have been there during the night, and, therefore, that it brought those two individuals to the house.
Why, the height of a man, in nine cases out of ten, can be told from the length of his stride. It is a simple calculation enough, though there is no use my boring you with figures.
I had this fellow's stride both on the clay outside and on the dust within. Then I had a way of checking my calculation.
When a man writes on a wall, his instinct leads him to write about the level of his own eyes. Now that writing was just over six feet from the ground.
Well, if a man can stride four and a-half feet without the smallest effort, he can't be quite in the sere and yellow.
That was the breadth of a puddle on the garden walk which he had evidently walked across. Patent-leather boots had gone round, and Square-toes had hopped over.
There is no mystery about it at all. I am simply applying to ordinary life a few of those precepts of observation and deduction which I advocated in that article.
I gathered up some scattered ash from the floor. It was dark in colour and flakey-such an ash as is only made by a Trichinopoly.
Ah, that was a more daring shot, though I have no doubt that I was right. You must not ask me that at the present state of the affair.
I passed my hand over my brow. "My head is in a whirl," I remarked; "the more one thinks of it the more mysterious it grows.
How came these two men-if there were two men-into an empty house? What has become of the cabman who drove them?
How could one man compel another to take poison? Where did the blood come from? What was the object of the murderer, since robbery had no part in it?
How came the woman's ring there? Above all, why should the second man write up the German word RACHE before decamping?
"You sum up the difficulties of the situation succinctly and well," he said. "There is much that is still obscure, though I have quite made up my mind on the main facts.
As to poor Lestrade's discovery it was simply a blind intended to put the police upon a wrong track, by suggesting Socialism and secret societies.
It was simply a ruse to divert inquiry into a wrong channel. I'm not going to tell you much more of the case, Doctor.
You know a conjuror gets no credit when once he has explained his trick, and if I show you too much of my method of working, you will come to the conclusion that I am a very ordinary individual after all.
"I shall never do that," I answered; "you have brought detection as near an exact science as it ever will be brought in this world."
My companion flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnest way in which I uttered them. I had already observed that he was as sensitive to flattery on the score of his art as any girl could be of her beauty.
"I'll tell you one other thing," he said. "Patent-leathers and Square-toes came in the same cab, and they walked down the pathway together as friendly as possible-arm-in-arm, in all probability.
When they got inside they walked up and down the room-or rather, Patent-leathers stood still while Square-toes walked up and down.
I could read all that in the dust; and I could read that as he walked he grew more and more excited. That is shown by the increased length of his strides.
He was talking all the while, and working himself up, no doubt, into a fury. Then the tragedy occurred.
I've told you all I know myself now, for the rest is mere surmise and conjecture. We have a good working basis, however, on which to start.
This conversation had occurred while our cab had been threading its way through a long succession of dingy streets and dreary by-ways.
In the dingiest and dreariest of them our driver suddenly came to a stand. "That's Audley Court in there," he said, pointing to a narrow slit in the line of dead-coloured brick.
Audley Court was not an attractive locality. The narrow passage led us into a quadrangle paved with flags and lined by sordid dwellings.
On enquiry we found that the constable was in bed, and we were shown into a little front parlour to await his coming.
He appeared presently, looking a little irritable at being disturbed in his slumbers. "I made my report at the office," he said.
Holmes took a half-sovereign from his pocket and played with it pensively. "We thought that we should like to hear it all from your own lips," he said.
"I shall be most happy to tell you anything I can," the constable answered with his eyes upon the little golden disk.
Rance sat down on the horsehair sofa, and knitted his brows as though determined not to omit anything in his narrative.
"I'll tell it ye from the beginning," he said. "My time is from ten at night to six in the morning. At eleven there was a fight at the 'White Hart'; but bar that all was quiet enough on the beat.
At one o'clock it began to rain, and I met Harry Murcher-him who has the Holland Grove beat-and we stood together at the corner of Henrietta Street a-talkin'.
Presently-maybe about two or a little after-I thought I would take a look round and see that all was right down the Brixton Road.
It was precious dirty and lonely. Not a soul did I meet all the way down, though a cab or two went past me.
I was a strollin' down, thinkin' between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hot would be, when suddenly the glint of a light caught my eye in the window of that same house.
I was knocked all in a heap therefore at seeing a light in the window, and I suspected as something was wrong.
"You stopped, and then walked back to the garden gate," my companion interrupted. "What did you do that for?"
Rance gave a violent jump, and stared at Sherlock Holmes with the utmost amazement upon his features.
I ain't afeared of anything on this side o' the grave; but I thought that maybe it was him that died o' the typhoid inspecting the drains what killed him.
The thought gave me a kind o' turn, and I walked back to the gate to see if I could see Murcher's lantern, but there wasn't no sign of him nor of anyone else.
Not a livin' soul, sir, nor as much as a dog. Then I pulled myself together and went back and pushed the door open.
All was quiet inside, so I went into the room where the light was a-burnin'. There was a candle flickerin' on the mantelpiece-a red wax one-and by its light I saw--
Yes, I know all that you saw. You walked round the room several times, and you knelt down by the body, and then you walked through and tried the kitchen door, and then--
John Rance sprang to his feet with a frightened face and suspicion in his eyes. "Where was you hid to see all that?"
Holmes laughed and threw his card across the table to the constable. "Don't get arresting me for the murder," he said.
I am one of the hounds and not the wolf; Mr. Gregson or Mr. Lestrade will answer for that. Go on, though.
Rance resumed his seat, without however losing his mystified expression. "I went back to the gate and sounded my whistle.
The constable's features broadened into a grin. "I've seen many a drunk chap in my time," he said, "but never anyone so cryin' drunk as that cove.
He was at the gate when I came out, a-leanin' up agin the railings, and a-singin' at the pitch o' his lungs about Columbine's New-fangled Banner, or some such stuff.
John Rance appeared to be somewhat irritated at this digression. "He was an uncommon drunk sort o' man," he said.
I should think I did notice them, seeing that I had to prop him up-me and Murcher between us. He was a long chap, with a red face, the lower part muffled round--
"We'd enough to do without lookin' after him," the policeman said, in an aggrieved voice. "I'll wager he found his way home all right."
"He must have left it behind," muttered my companion. "You didn't happen to see or hear a cab after that?"
"There's a half-sovereign for you," my companion said, standing up and taking his hat. "I am afraid, Rance, that you will never rise in the force.
That head of yours should be for use as well as ornament. You might have gained your sergeant's stripes last night.
The man whom you held in your hands is the man who holds the clue of this mystery, and whom we are seeking.
"The blundering fool," Holmes said, bitterly, as we drove back to our lodgings. "Just to think of his having such an incomparable bit of good luck, and not taking advantage of it."
I am rather in the dark still. It is true that the description of this man tallies with your idea of the second party in this mystery.
The ring, man, the ring: that was what he came back for. If we have no other way of catching him, we can always bait our line with the ring.
And now for lunch, and then for Norman Neruda. Her attack and her bowing are splendid. What's that little thing of Chopin's she plays so magnificently: Tra-la-la-lira-lira-lay.
Leaning back in the cab, this amateur bloodhound carolled away like a lark while I meditated upon the many-sidedness of the human mind.
It was a useless attempt. My mind had been too much excited by all that had occurred, and the strangest fancies and surmises crowded into it.
Every time that I closed my eyes I saw before me the distorted baboon-like countenance of the murdered man.
So sinister was the impression which that face had produced upon me that I found it difficult to feel anything but gratitude for him who had removed its owner from the world.
If ever human features bespoke vice of the most malignant type, they were certainly those of Enoch J. Drebber, of Cleveland.
Still I recognized that justice must be done, and that the depravity of the victim was no condonement in the eyes of the law.
The more I thought of it the more extraordinary did my companion's hypothesis, that the man had been poisoned, appear.
I remembered how he had sniffed his lips, and had no doubt that he had detected something which had given rise to the idea.
Then, again, if not poison, what had caused the man's death, since there was neither wound nor marks of strangulation?
But, on the other hand, whose blood was that which lay so thickly upon the floor? There were no signs of a struggle, nor had the victim any weapon with which he might have wounded an antagonist.
As long as all these questions were unsolved, I felt that sleep would be no easy matter, either for Holmes or myself.
His quiet self-confident manner convinced me that he had already formed a theory which explained all the facts, though what it was I could not for an instant conjecture.
He was very late in returning-so late, that I knew that the concert could not have detained him all the time.
Perhaps that is why we are so subtly influenced by it. There are vague memories in our souls of those misty centuries when the world was in its childhood.
"One's ideas must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpret Nature," he answered. "What's the matter?
"To tell the truth, it has," I said. "I ought to be more case-hardened after my Afghan experiences. I saw my own comrades hacked to pieces at Maiwand without losing my nerve."
I can understand. There is a mystery about this which stimulates the imagination; where there is no imagination there is no horror.
It gives a fairly good account of the affair. It does not mention the fact that when the man was raised up, a woman's wedding ring fell upon the floor.
"Look at this advertisement," he answered. "I had one sent to every paper this morning immediately after the affair."
He threw the paper across to me and I glanced at the place indicated. It was the first announcement in the "Found" column.
"In Brixton Road, this morning," it ran, "a plain gold wedding ring, found in the roadway between the 'White Hart' Tavern and Holland Grove.
"Excuse my using your name," he said. "If I used my own some of these dunderheads would recognize it, and want to meddle in the affair."
Why, the man in the brown coat-our florid friend with the square toes. If he does not come himself he will send an accomplice.
Not at all. If my view of the case is correct, and I have every reason to believe that it is, this man would rather risk anything than lose the ring.
According to my notion he dropped it while stooping over Drebber's body, and did not miss it at the time.
After leaving the house he discovered his loss and hurried back, but found the police already in possession, owing to his own folly in leaving the candle burning.
He had to pretend to be drunk in order to allay the suspicions which might have been aroused by his appearance at the gate.
Now put yourself in that man's place. On thinking the matter over, it must have occurred to him that it was possible that he had lost the ring in the road after leaving the house.
What would he do, then? He would eagerly look out for the evening papers in the hope of seeing it among the articles found.
His eye, of course, would light upon this. He would be overjoyed. Why should he fear a trap? There would be no reason in his eyes why the finding of the ring should be connected with the murder.
You had better clean it and load it. He will be a desperate man, and though I shall take him unawares, it is as well to be ready for anything.
I went to my bedroom and followed his advice. When I returned with the pistol the table had been cleared, and Holmes was engaged in his favourite occupation of scraping upon his violin.
"The plot thickens," he said, as I entered; "I have just had an answer to my American telegram. My view of the case is the correct one."
"My fiddle would be the better for new strings," he remarked. "Put your pistol in your pocket. When the fellow comes speak to him in an ordinary way.
Yes. He will probably be here in a few minutes. Open the door slightly. That will do. Now put the key on the inside.
Thank you! This is a queer old book I picked up at a stall yesterday-'De Jure inter Gentes'-published in Latin at Liege in the Lowlands, in 1642.
Philippe de Croy, whoever he may have been. On the fly-leaf, in very faded ink, is written 'Ex libris Guliolmi Whyte.'
I wonder who William Whyte was. Some pragmatical seventeenth century lawyer, I suppose. His writing has a legal twist about it.
As he spoke there was a sharp ring at the bell. Sherlock Holmes rose softly and moved his chair in the direction of the door.
"Does Dr. Watson live here?" asked a clear but rather harsh voice. We could not hear the servant's reply, but the door closed, and some one began to ascend the stairs.
The footfall was an uncertain and shuffling one. A look of surprise passed over the face of my companion as he listened to it.
At my summons, instead of the man of violence whom we expected, a very old and wrinkled woman hobbled into the apartment.
She appeared to be dazzled by the sudden blaze of light, and after dropping a curtsey, she stood blinking at us with her bleared eyes and fumbling in her pocket with nervous, shaky fingers.
I glanced at my companion, and his face had assumed such a disconsolate expression that it was all I could do to keep my countenance.
The old crone drew out an evening paper, and pointed at our advertisement. "It's this as has brought me, good gentlemen," she said, dropping another curtsey; "a gold wedding ring in the Brixton Road.
"The Lord be thanked!" cried the old woman; "Sally will be a glad woman this night. That's the ring."
The old woman faced round and looked keenly at him from her little red-rimmed eyes. "The gentleman asked me for my address," she said.
My name is Sawyer-her's is Dennis, which Tom Dennis married her-and a smart, clean lad, too, as long as he's at sea, and no steward in the company more thought of; but when on shore, what with the women and what with liquor shops--
"Here is your ring, Mrs. Sawyer," I interrupted, in obedience to a sign from my companion; "it clearly belongs to your daughter, and I am glad to be able to restore it to the rightful owner."
With many mumbled blessings and protestations of gratitude the old crone packed it away in her pocket, and shuffled off down the stairs.
Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet the moment that she was gone and rushed into his room. He returned in a few seconds enveloped in an ulster and a cravat.
"I'll follow her," he said, hurriedly; "she must be an accomplice, and will lead me to him. Wait up for me."
"Either his whole theory is incorrect," I thought to myself, "or else he will be led now to the heart of the mystery."
There was no need for him to ask me to wait up for him, for I felt that sleep was impossible until I heard the result of his adventure.
Ten o'clock passed, and I heard the footsteps of the maid as they pattered off to bed. Eleven, and the more stately tread of the landlady passed my door, bound for the same destination.
It was close upon twelve before I heard the sharp sound of his latch-key. The instant he entered I saw by his face that he had not been successful.
Amusement and chagrin seemed to be struggling for the mastery, until the former suddenly carried the day, and he burst into a hearty laugh.
"I wouldn't have the Scotland Yarders know it for the world," he cried, dropping into his chair; "I have chaffed them so much that they would never have let me hear the end of it.
Oh, I don't mind telling a story against myself. That creature had gone a little way when she began to limp and show every sign of being foot-sore.
This begins to look genuine, I thought, and having seen her safely inside, I perched myself behind. That's an art which every detective should be an expert at.
Well, away we rattled, and never drew rein until we reached the street in question. I hopped off before we came to the door, and strolled down the street in an easy, lounging way.
I saw the cab pull up. The driver jumped down, and I saw him open the door and stand expectantly. Nothing came out though.
When I reached him he was groping about frantically in the empty cab, and giving vent to the finest assorted collection of oaths that ever I listened to.
There was no sign or trace of his passenger, and I fear it will be some time before he gets his fare.
On inquiring at Number 13 we found that the house belonged to a respectable paperhanger, named Keswick, and that no one of the name either of Sawyer or Dennis had ever been heard of there.
"You don't mean to say," I cried, in amazement, "that that tottering, feeble old woman was able to get out of the cab while it was in motion, without either you or the driver seeing her?"
"Old woman be damned!" said Sherlock Holmes, sharply. "We were the old women to be so taken in. It must have been a young man, and an active one, too, besides being an incomparable actor.
The get-up was inimitable. He saw that he was followed, no doubt, and used this means of giving me the slip.
It shows that the man we are after is not as lonely as I imagined he was, but has friends who are ready to risk something for him.
I was certainly feeling very weary, so I obeyed his injunction. I left Holmes seated in front of the smouldering fire, and long into the watches of the night I heard the low, melancholy wailings of his violin, and knew that he was still pondering over the strange problem which he had set himself to unravel.
The papers next day were full of the "Brixton Mystery," as they termed it. Each had a long account of the affair, and some had leaders upon it in addition.
There was some information in them which was new to me. I still retain in my scrap-book numerous clippings and extracts bearing upon the case.
The _Daily Telegraph_ remarked that in the history of crime there had seldom been a tragedy which presented stranger features.
The German name of the victim, the absence of all other motive, and the sinister inscription on the wall, all pointed to its perpetration by political refugees and revolutionists.
The Socialists had many branches in America, and the deceased had, no doubt, infringed their unwritten laws, and been tracked down by them.
After alluding airily to the Vehmgericht, aqua tofana, Carbonari, the Marchioness de Brinvilliers, the Darwinian theory, the principles of Malthus, and the Ratcliff Highway murders, the article concluded by admonishing the Government and advocating a closer watch over foreigners in England.
The Standard commented upon the fact that lawless outrages of the sort usually occurred under a Liberal Administration.
They arose from the unsettling of the minds of the masses, and the consequent weakening of all authority.
The deceased was an American gentleman who had been residing for some weeks in the Metropolis. He had stayed at the boarding-house of Madame Charpentier, in Torquay Terrace, Camberwell.
How he came there, or how he met his fate, are questions which are still involved in mystery. Nothing is known of the whereabouts of Stangerson.
We are glad to learn that Mr. Lestrade and Mr. Gregson, of Scotland Yard, are both engaged upon the case, and it is confidently anticipated that these well-known officers will speedily throw light upon the matter.
Among these men there was a stringent code of honour, any infringement of which was punished by death.
Every effort should be made to find the secretary, Stangerson, and to ascertain some particulars of the habits of the deceased.
A great step had been gained by the discovery of the address of the house at which he had boarded-a result which was entirely due to the acuteness and energy of Mr. Gregson of Scotland Yard.
Sherlock Holmes and I read these notices over together at breakfast, and they appeared to afford him considerable amusement.
Oh, bless you, it doesn't matter in the least. If the man is caught, it will be _on account_ of their exertions; if he escapes, it will be _in spite_ of their exertions.
It's heads I win and tails you lose. Whatever they do, they will have followers. 'Un sot trouve toujours un plus sot qui l'admire.'
"What on earth is this?" I cried, for at this moment there came the pattering of many steps in the hall and on the stairs, accompanied by audible expressions of disgust upon the part of our landlady.
"It's the Baker Street division of the detective police force," said my companion, gravely; and as he spoke there rushed into the room half a dozen of the dirtiest and most ragged street Arabs that ever I clapped eyes on.
"'Tention!" cried Holmes, in a sharp tone, and the six dirty little scoundrels stood in a line like so many disreputable statuettes.
In future you shall send up Wiggins alone to report, and the rest of you must wait in the street. Have you found it, Wiggins?
"I hardly expected you would. You must keep on until you do. Here are your wages." He handed each of them a shilling.
He waved his hand, and they scampered away downstairs like so many rats, and we heard their shrill voices next moment in the street.
"There's more work to be got out of one of those little beggars than out of a dozen of the force," Holmes remarked.
The mere sight of an official-looking person seals men's lips. These youngsters, however, go everywhere and hear everything.
Yes; there is a point which I wish to ascertain. It is merely a matter of time. Hullo! we are going to hear some news now with a vengeance!
Here is Gregson coming down the road with beatitude written upon every feature of his face. Bound for us, I know.
There was a violent peal at the bell, and in a few seconds the fair-haired detective came up the stairs, three steps at a time, and burst into our sitting-room.
"My dear fellow," he cried, wringing Holmes' unresponsive hand, "congratulate me! I have made the whole thing as clear as day."
"Arthur Charpentier, sub-lieutenant in Her Majesty's navy," cried Gregson, pompously, rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest.
"Take a seat, and try one of these cigars," he said. "We are anxious to know how you managed it. Will you have some whiskey and water?"
"I don't mind if I do," the detective answered. "The tremendous exertions which I have gone through during the last day or two have worn me out.
Not so much bodily exertion, you understand, as the strain upon the mind. You will appreciate that, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, for we are both brain-workers.
"You do me too much honour," said Holmes, gravely. "Let us hear how you arrived at this most gratifying result."
The detective seated himself in the arm-chair, and puffed complacently at his cigar. Then suddenly he slapped his thigh in a paroxysm of amusement.
"The fun of it is," he cried, "that that fool Lestrade, who thinks himself so smart, has gone off upon the wrong track altogether.
He is after the secretary Stangerson, who had no more to do with the crime than the babe unborn. I have no doubt that he has caught him by this time.
Ah, I'll tell you all about it. Of course, Doctor Watson, this is strictly between ourselves. The first difficulty which we had to contend with was the finding of this American's antecedents.
Some people would have waited until their advertisements were answered, or until parties came forward and volunteered information.
"Ha!" cried Gregson, in a relieved voice; "you should never neglect a chance, however small it may seem."
Well, I went to Underwood, and asked him if he had sold a hat of that size and description. He looked over his books, and came on it at once.
He had sent the hat to a Mr. Drebber, residing at Charpentier's Boarding Establishment, Torquay Terrace.
This statement came from Mrs. Charpentier's lips with many gasps and pauses. At times she spoke so low that I could hardly catch the words.
I made shorthand notes of all that she said, however, so that there should be no possibility of a mistake.
Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. I found out where Lieutenant Charpentier was, took two officers with me, and arrested him.
He still carried the heavy stick which the mother described him as having with him when he followed Drebber.
The night was so wet that no one was about, so Charpentier dragged the body of his victim into the empty house.
As to the candle, and the blood, and the writing on the wall, and the ring, they may all be so many tricks to throw the police on to the wrong scent.
"Well done!" said Holmes in an encouraging voice. "Really, Gregson, you are getting along. We shall make something of you yet."
On his way home he met an old shipmate, and took a long walk with him. On being asked where this old shipmate lived, he was unable to give any satisfactory reply.
I think the whole case fits together uncommonly well. What amuses me is to think of Lestrade, who had started off upon the wrong scent.
It was indeed Lestrade, who had ascended the stairs while we were talking, and who now entered the room.
The assurance and jauntiness which generally marked his demeanour and dress were, however, wanting. His face was disturbed and troubled, while his clothes were disarranged and untidy.
He had evidently come with the intention of consulting with Sherlock Holmes, for on perceiving his colleague he appeared to be embarrassed and put out.
He stood in the centre of the room, fumbling nervously with his hat and uncertain what to do. "This is a most extraordinary case," he said at last-"a most incomprehensible affair."
"Ah, you find it so, Mr. Lestrade!" cried Gregson, triumphantly. "I thought you would come to that conclusion.
"The Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson," said Lestrade gravely, "was murdered at Halliday's Private Hotel about six o'clock this morning."
The intelligence with which Lestrade greeted us was so momentous and so unexpected, that we were all three fairly dumfoundered.
Gregson sprang out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey and water. I stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes, whose lips were compressed and his brows drawn down over his eyes.
"It was quite thick enough before," grumbled Lestrade, taking a chair. "I seem to have dropped into a sort of council of war."
"We have been hearing Gregson's view of the matter," Holmes observed. "Would you mind letting us know what you have seen and done?"
"I have no objection," Lestrade answered, seating himself. "I freely confess that I was of the opinion that Stangerson was concerned in the death of Drebber.
This fresh development has shown me that I was completely mistaken. Full of the one idea, I set myself to find out what had become of the Secretary.
They had been seen together at Euston Station about half-past eight on the evening of the third. At two in the morning Drebber had been found in the Brixton Road.
The question which confronted me was to find out how Stangerson had been employed between 8.30 and the time of the crime, and what had become of him afterwards.
I telegraphed to Liverpool, giving a description of the man, and warning them to keep a watch upon the American boats.
I then set to work calling upon all the hotels and lodging-houses in the vicinity of Euston. You see, I argued that if Drebber and his companion had become separated, the natural course for the latter would be to put up somewhere in the vicinity for the night, and then to hang about the station again next morning.
It seemed to me that my sudden appearance might shake his nerves and lead him to say something unguarded.
The Boots volunteered to show me the room: it was on the second floor, and there was a small corridor leading up to it.
The Boots pointed out the door to me, and was about to go downstairs again when I saw something that made me feel sickish, in spite of my twenty years' experience.
From under the door there curled a little red ribbon of blood, which had meandered across the passage and formed a little pool along the skirting at the other side.
I gave a cry, which brought the Boots back. He nearly fainted when he saw it. The door was locked on the inside, but we put our shoulders to it, and knocked it in.
The window of the room was open, and beside the window, all huddled up, lay the body of a man in his nightdress.
The cause of death was a deep stab in the left side, which must have penetrated the heart. And now comes the strangest part of the affair.
I felt a creeping of the flesh, and a presentiment of coming horror, even before Sherlock Holmes answered.
There was something so methodical and so incomprehensible about the deeds of this unknown assassin, that it imparted a fresh ghastliness to his crimes.
"The man was seen," continued Lestrade. "A milk boy, passing on his way to the dairy, happened to walk down the lane which leads from the mews at the back of the hotel.
He noticed that a ladder, which usually lay there, was raised against one of the windows of the second floor, which was wide open.
After passing, he looked back and saw a man descend the ladder. He came down so quietly and openly that the boy imagined him to be some carpenter or joiner at work in the hotel.
He took no particular notice of him, beyond thinking in his own mind that it was early for him to be at work.
He has an impression that the man was tall, had a reddish face, and was dressed in a long, brownish coat.
He must have stayed in the room some little time after the murder, for we found blood-stained water in the basin, where he had washed his hands, and marks on the sheets where he had deliberately wiped his knife.
I glanced at Holmes on hearing the description of the murderer, which tallied so exactly with his own.
Nothing. Stangerson had Drebber's purse in his pocket, but it seems that this was usual, as he did all the paying.
There was eighty odd pounds in it, but nothing had been taken. Whatever the motives of these extraordinary crimes, robbery is certainly not one of them.
There were no papers or memoranda in the murdered man's pocket, except a single telegram, dated from Cleveland about a month ago, and containing the words, 'J.
Nothing of any importance. The man's novel, with which he had read himself to sleep was lying upon the bed, and his pipe was on a chair beside him.
There was a glass of water on the table, and on the window-sill a small chip ointment box containing a couple of pills.
"I have now in my hands," my companion said, confidently, "all the threads which have formed such a tangle.
"I have them," said Lestrade, producing a small white box; "I took them and the purse and the telegram, intending to have them put in a place of safety at the Police Station.
It was the merest chance my taking these pills, for I am bound to say that I do not attach any importance to them.
They certainly were not. They were of a pearly grey colour, small, round, and almost transparent against the light.
"From their lightness and transparency, I should imagine that they are soluble in water," I remarked.
"Precisely so," answered Holmes. "Now would you mind going down and fetching that poor little devil of a terrier which has been bad so long, and which the landlady wanted you to put out of its pain yesterday."
I went downstairs and carried the dog upstairs in my arms. Its laboured breathing and glazing eye showed that it was not far from its end.
Indeed, its snow-white muzzle proclaimed that it had already exceeded the usual term of canine existence.
"I will now cut one of these pills in two," said Holmes, and drawing his penknife he suited the action to the word.
One half we return into the box for future purposes. The other half I will place in this wine glass, in which is a teaspoonful of water.
"This may be very interesting," said Lestrade, in the injured tone of one who suspects that he is being laughed at, "I cannot see, however, what it has to do with the death of Mr. Joseph Stangerson."
Patience, my friend, patience! You will find in time that it has everything to do with it. I shall now add a little milk to make the mixture palatable, and on presenting it to the dog we find that he laps it up readily enough.
As he spoke he turned the contents of the wine glass into a saucer and placed it in front of the terrier, who speedily licked it dry.
Sherlock Holmes' earnest demeanour had so far convinced us that we all sat in silence, watching the animal intently, and expecting some startling effect.
None such appeared, however. The dog continued to lie stretched upon the cushion, breathing in a laboured way, but apparently neither the better nor the worse for its draught.
Holmes had taken out his watch, and as minute followed minute without result, an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointment appeared upon his features.
He gnawed his lip, drummed his fingers upon the table, and showed every other symptom of acute impatience.
So great was his emotion, that I felt sincerely sorry for him, while the two detectives smiled derisively, by no means displeased at this check which he had met.
"It can't be a coincidence," he cried, at last springing from his chair and pacing wildly up and down the room; "it is impossible that it should be a mere coincidence.
The very pills which I suspected in the case of Drebber are actually found after the death of Stangerson.
And yet they are inert. What can it mean? Surely my whole chain of reasoning cannot have been false. It is impossible!
The unfortunate creature's tongue seemed hardly to have been moistened in it before it gave a convulsive shiver in every limb, and lay as rigid and lifeless as if it had been struck by lightning.
Of the two pills in that box one was of the most deadly poison, and the other was entirely harmless. I ought to have known that before ever I saw the box at all.
This last statement appeared to me to be so startling, that I could hardly believe that he was in his sober senses.
There was the dead dog, however, to prove that his conjecture had been correct. It seemed to me that the mists in my own mind were gradually clearing away, and I began to have a dim, vague perception of the truth.
"All this seems strange to you," continued Holmes, "because you failed at the beginning of the inquiry to grasp the importance of the single real clue which was presented to you.
I had the good fortune to seize upon that, and everything which has occurred since then has served to confirm my original supposition, and, indeed, was the logical sequence of it.
Hence things which have perplexed you and made the case more obscure, have served to enlighten me and to strengthen my conclusions.
It is a mistake to confound strangeness with mystery. The most commonplace crime is often the most mysterious because it presents no new or special features from which deductions may be drawn.
These strange details, far from making the case more difficult, have really had the effect of making it less so.
Mr. Gregson, who had listened to this address with considerable impatience, could contain himself no longer.
"Look here, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," he said, "we are all ready to acknowledge that you are a smart man, and that you have your own methods of working.
We want something more than mere theory and preaching now, though. It is a case of taking the man. I have made my case out, and it seems I was wrong.
Young Charpentier could not have been engaged in this second affair. Lestrade went after his man, Stangerson, and it appears that he was wrong too.
You have thrown out hints here, and hints there, and seem to know more than we do, but the time has come when we feel that we have a right to ask you straight how much you do know of the business.
"I cannot help feeling that Gregson is right, sir," remarked Lestrade. "We have both tried, and we have both failed.
You have remarked more than once since I have been in the room that you had all the evidence which you require.
"Any delay in arresting the assassin," I observed, "might give him time to perpetrate some fresh atrocity."
Thus pressed by us all, Holmes showed signs of irresolution. He continued to walk up and down the room with his head sunk on his chest and his brows drawn down, as was his habit when lost in thought.
"There will be no more murders," he said at last, stopping abruptly and facing us. "You can put that consideration out of the question.
You have asked me if I know the name of the assassin. I do. The mere knowing of his name is a small thing, however, compared with the power of laying our hands upon him.
Without meaning to hurt either of your feelings, I am bound to say that I consider these men to be more than a match for the official force, and that is why I have not asked your assistance.
If I fail I shall, of course, incur all the blame due to this omission; but that I am prepared for. At present I am ready to promise that the instant that I can communicate with you without endangering my own combinations, I shall do so.
Gregson and Lestrade seemed to be far from satisfied by this assurance, or by the depreciating allusion to the detective police.
The former had flushed up to the roots of his flaxen hair, while the other's beady eyes glistened with curiosity and resentment.
Neither of them had time to speak, however, before there was a tap at the door, and the spokesman of the street Arabs, young Wiggins, introduced his insignificant and unsavoury person.
"Good boy," said Holmes, blandly. "Why don't you introduce this pattern at Scotland Yard?" he continued, taking a pair of steel handcuffs from a drawer.
"Very good, very good," said Holmes, smiling. "The cabman may as well help me with my boxes. Just ask him to step up, Wiggins."
I was surprised to find my companion speaking as though he were about to set out on a journey, since he had not said anything to me about it.
There was a small portmanteau in the room, and this he pulled out and began to strap. He was busily engaged at it when the cabman entered the room.
"Just give me a help with this buckle, cabman," he said, kneeling over his task, and never turning his head.
The fellow came forward with a somewhat sullen, defiant air, and put down his hands to assist. At that instant there was a sharp click, the jangling of metal, and Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet again.
"Gentlemen," he cried, with flashing eyes, "let me introduce you to Mr. Jefferson Hope, the murderer of Enoch Drebber and of Joseph Stangerson."
For a second or two we might have been a group of statues. Then, with an inarticulate roar of fury, the prisoner wrenched himself free from Holmes's grasp, and hurled himself through the window.
Woodwork and glass gave way before him; but before he got quite through, Gregson, Lestrade, and Holmes sprang upon him like so many staghounds.
He was dragged back into the room, and then commenced a terrific conflict. So powerful and so fierce was he, that the four of us were shaken off again and again.
"We have his cab," said Sherlock Holmes. "It will serve to take him to Scotland Yard. And now, gentlemen," he continued, with a pleasant smile, "we have reached the end of our little mystery.
You are very welcome to put any questions that you like to me now, and there is no danger that I will refuse to answer them.
In the central portion of the great North American Continent there lies an arid and repulsive desert, which for many a long year served as a barrier against the advance of civilisation.
From the Sierra Nevada to Nebraska, and from the Yellowstone River in the north to the Colorado upon the south, is a region of desolation and silence.
Nor is Nature always in one mood throughout this grim district. It comprises snow-capped and lofty mountains, and dark and gloomy valleys.
The coyote skulks among the scrub, the buzzard flaps heavily through the air, and the clumsy grizzly bear lumbers through the dark ravines, and picks up such sustenance as it can amongst the rocks.
In the whole world there can be no more dreary view than that from the northern slope of the Sierra Blanco.
As far as the eye can reach stretches the great flat plain-land, all dusted over with patches of alkali, and intersected by clumps of the dwarfish chaparral bushes.
On the extreme verge of the horizon lie a long chain of mountain peaks, with their rugged summits flecked with snow.
Listen as one may, there is no shadow of a sound in all that mighty wilderness; nothing but silence-complete and heart-subduing silence.
It is rutted with wheels and trodden down by the feet of many adventurers. Here and there there are scattered white objects which glisten in the sun, and stand out against the dull deposit of alkali.
Approach, and examine them! They are bones: some large and coarse, others smaller and more delicate. The former have belonged to oxen, and the latter to men.
For fifteen hundred miles one may trace this ghastly caravan route by these scattered remains of those who had fallen by the wayside.
Looking down on this very scene, there stood upon the fourth of May, eighteen hundred and forty-seven, a solitary traveller.
His appearance was such that he might have been the very genius or demon of the region. An observer would have found it difficult to say whether he was nearer to forty or to sixty.
As he stood, he leaned upon his weapon for support, and yet his tall figure and the massive framework of his bones suggested a wiry and vigorous constitution.
His gaunt face, however, and his clothes, which hung so baggily over his shrivelled limbs, proclaimed what it was that gave him that senile and decrepit appearance.
He had toiled painfully down the ravine, and on to this little elevation, in the vain hope of seeing some signs of water.
Now the great salt plain stretched before his eyes, and the distant belt of savage mountains, without a sign anywhere of plant or tree, which might indicate the presence of moisture.
"Why not here, as well as in a feather bed, twenty years hence," he muttered, as he seated himself in the shelter of a boulder.
Before sitting down, he had deposited upon the ground his useless rifle, and also a large bundle tied up in a grey shawl, which he had carried slung over his right shoulder.
It appeared to be somewhat too heavy for his strength, for in lowering it, it came down on the ground with some little violence.
Instantly there broke from the grey parcel a little moaning cry, and from it there protruded a small, scared face, with very bright brown eyes, and two little speckled, dimpled fists.
The child was pale and wan, but her healthy arms and legs showed that she had suffered less than her companion.
"How is it now?" he answered anxiously, for she was still rubbing the towsy golden curls which covered the back of her head.
"Kiss it and make it well," she said, with perfect gravity, showing the injured part up to him. "That's what mother used to do.
"Gone, eh!" said the little girl. "Funny, she didn't say good-bye; she 'most always did if she was just goin' over to Auntie's for tea, and now she's been away three days.
No, there ain't nothing, dearie. You'll just need to be patient awhile, and then you'll be all right.
Put your head up agin me like that, and then you'll feel bullier. It ain't easy to talk when your lips is like leather, but I guess I'd best let you know how the cards lie.
"Pretty things! fine things!" cried the little girl enthusiastically, holding up two glittering fragments of mica.
"You'll see prettier things than them soon," said the man confidently. "You just wait a bit. I was going to tell you though-you remember when we left the river?"
Well, we reckoned we'd strike another river soon, d'ye see. But there was somethin' wrong; compasses, or map, or somethin', and it didn't turn up.
No, nor drink. And Mr. Bender, he was the fust to go, and then Indian Pete, and then Mrs. McGregor, and then Johnny Hones, and then, dearie, your mother.
"Then mother's a deader too," cried the little girl dropping her face in her pinafore and sobbing bitterly.
Yes, they all went except you and me. Then I thought there was some chance of water in this direction, so I heaved you over my shoulder and we tramped it together.
"Do you mean that we are going to die too?" asked the child, checking her sobs, and raising her tear-stained face.
"Why didn't you say so before?" she said, laughing gleefully. "You gave me such a fright. Why, of course, now as long as we die we'll be with mother again."
They speedily resolved themselves into three large brown birds, which circled over the heads of the two wanderers, and then settled upon some rocks which overlooked them.
"Cocks and hens," cried the little girl gleefully, pointing at their ill-omened forms, and clapping her hands to make them rise.
"He made the country down in Illinois, and He made the Missouri," the little girl continued. "I guess somebody else made the country in these parts.
It don't matter. It ain't quite regular, but He won't mind that, you bet. You say over them ones that you used to say every night in the waggon when we was on the Plains.
"I disremember them," he answered. "I hain't said none since I was half the height o' that gun. I guess it's never too late.
"Then you'll need to kneel down, and me too," she said, laying the shawl out for that purpose. "You've got to put your hands up like this.
It was a strange sight had there been anything but the buzzards to see it. Side by side on the narrow shawl knelt the two wanderers, the little prattling child and the reckless, hardened adventurer.
The prayer finished, they resumed their seat in the shadow of the boulder until the child fell asleep, nestling upon the broad breast of her protector.
He watched over her slumber for some time, but Nature proved to be too strong for him. For three days and three nights he had allowed himself neither rest nor repose.
Slowly the eyelids drooped over the tired eyes, and the head sunk lower and lower upon the breast, until the man's grizzled beard was mixed with the gold tresses of his companion, and both slept the same deep and dreamless slumber.
This cloud continued to increase in size until it became evident that it could only be raised by a great multitude of moving creatures.
In more fertile spots the observer would have come to the conclusion that one of those great herds of bisons which graze upon the prairie land was approaching him.
But what a caravan! When the head of it had reached the base of the mountains, the rear was not yet visible on the horizon.
Right across the enormous plain stretched the straggling array, waggons and carts, men on horseback, and men on foot.
Innumerable women who staggered along under burdens, and children who toddled beside the waggons or peeped out from under the white coverings.
This was evidently no ordinary party of immigrants, but rather some nomad people who had been compelled from stress of circumstances to seek themselves a new country.
There rose through the clear air a confused clattering and rumbling from this great mass of humanity, with the creaking of wheels and the neighing of horses.
At the head of the column there rode a score or more of grave ironfaced men, clad in sombre homespun garments and armed with rifles.
"The wells are to the right, my brothers," said one, a hard-lipped, clean-shaven man with grizzly hair.
"Fear not for water," cried a third. "He who could draw it from the rocks will not now abandon His own chosen people."
They were about to resume their journey when one of the youngest and keenest-eyed uttered an exclamation and pointed up at the rugged crag above them.
From its summit there fluttered a little wisp of pink, showing up hard and bright against the grey rocks behind.
At the sight there was a general reining up of horses and unslinging of guns, while fresh horsemen came galloping up to reinforce the vanguard.
"There can't be any number of Injuns here," said the elderly man who appeared to be in command. "We have passed the Pawnees, and there are no other tribes until we cross the great mountains."
The young man who had first given the alarm was leading them. Suddenly his followers saw him throw up his hands, as though overcome with astonishment, and on joining him they were affected in the same way by the sight which met their eyes.
On the little plateau which crowned the barren hill there stood a single giant boulder, and against this boulder there lay a tall man, long-bearded and hard-featured, but of an excessive thinness.
Her rosy lips were parted, showing the regular line of snow-white teeth within, and a playful smile played over her infantile features.
Her plump little white legs terminating in white socks and neat shoes with shining buckles, offered a strange contrast to the long shrivelled members of her companion.
On the ledge of rock above this strange couple there stood three solemn buzzards, who, at the sight of the new comers uttered raucous screams of disappointment and flapped sullenly away.
His face assumed an expression of incredulity as he gazed, and he passed his boney hand over his eyes.
"This is what they call delirium, I guess," he muttered. The child stood beside him, holding on to the skirt of his coat, and said nothing but looked all round her with the wondering questioning gaze of childhood.
The rescuing party were speedily able to convince the two castaways that their appearance was no delusion.
One of them seized the little girl, and hoisted her upon his shoulder, while two others supported her gaunt companion, and assisted him towards the waggons.
"My name is John Ferrier," the wanderer explained; "me and that little un are all that's left o' twenty-one people.
"I guess she is now," the other cried, defiantly; "she's mine 'cause I saved her. No man will take her from me.
She's Lucy Ferrier from this day on. Who are you, though?" he continued, glancing with curiosity at his stalwart, sunburned rescuers; "there seems to be a powerful lot of ye."
"Nigh upon ten thousand," said one of the young men; "we are the persecuted children of God-the chosen of the Angel Merona."
We have come from Nauvoo, in the State of Illinois, where we had founded our temple. We have come to seek a refuge from the violent man and from the godless, even though it be the heart of the desert.
The name of Nauvoo evidently recalled recollections to John Ferrier. "I see," he said, "you are the Mormons."
We do not know. The hand of God is leading us under the person of our Prophet. You must come before him.
They had reached the base of the hill by this time, and were surrounded by crowds of the pilgrims-pale-faced meek-looking women, strong laughing children, and anxious earnest-eyed men.
Many were the cries of astonishment and of commiseration which arose from them when they perceived the youth of one of the strangers and the destitution of the other.
He was reading a brown-backed volume, but as the crowd approached he laid it aside, and listened attentively to an account of the episode.
"If we take you with us," he said, in solemn words, "it can only be as believers in our own creed. We shall have no wolves in our fold.
Better far that your bones should bleach in this wilderness than that you should prove to be that little speck of decay which in time corrupts the whole fruit.
"Guess I'll come with you on any terms," said Ferrier, with such emphasis that the grave Elders could not restrain a smile.
"Take him, Brother Stangerson," he said, "give him food and drink, and the child likewise. Let it be your task also to teach him our holy creed.
"On, on to Zion!" cried the crowd of Mormons, and the words rippled down the long caravan, passing from mouth to mouth until they died away in a dull murmur in the far distance.
With a cracking of whips and a creaking of wheels the great waggons got into motion, and soon the whole caravan was winding along once more.
The Elder to whose care the two waifs had been committed, led them to his waggon, where a meal was already awaiting them.
"You shall remain here," he said. "In a few days you will have recovered from your fatigues. In the meantime, remember that now and for ever you are of our religion.
Brigham Young has said it, and he has spoken with the voice of Joseph Smith, which is the voice of God.
This is not the place to commemorate the trials and privations endured by the immigrant Mormons before they came to their final haven.
From the shores of the Mississippi to the western slopes of the Rocky Mountains they had struggled on with a constancy almost unparalleled in history.
The savage man, and the savage beast, hunger, thirst, fatigue, and disease-every impediment which Nature could place in the way, had all been overcome with Anglo-Saxon tenacity.
Yet the long journey and the accumulated terrors had shaken the hearts of the stoutest among them. There was not one who did not sink upon his knees in heartfelt prayer when they saw the broad valley of Utah bathed in the sunlight beneath them, and learned from the lips of their leader that this was the promised land, and that these virgin acres were to be theirs for evermore.
Young speedily proved himself to be a skilful administrator as well as a resolute chief. Maps were drawn and charts prepared, in which the future city was sketched out.
All around farms were apportioned and allotted in proportion to the standing of each individual. The tradesman was put to his trade and the artisan to his calling.
Everything prospered in the strange settlement. Above all, the great temple which they had erected in the centre of the city grew ever taller and larger.
From the first blush of dawn until the closing of the twilight, the clatter of the hammer and the rasp of the saw was never absent from the monument which the immigrants erected to Him who had led them safe through many dangers.
The two castaways, John Ferrier and the little girl who had shared his fortunes and had been adopted as his daughter, accompanied the Mormons to the end of their great pilgrimage.
Little Lucy Ferrier was borne along pleasantly enough in Elder Stangerson's waggon, a retreat which she shared with the Mormon's three wives and with his son, a headstrong forward boy of twelve.
In the meantime Ferrier having recovered from his privations, distinguished himself as a useful guide and an indefatigable hunter.
So rapidly did he gain the esteem of his new companions, that when they reached the end of their wanderings, it was unanimously agreed that he should be provided with as large and as fertile a tract of land as any of the settlers, with the exception of Young himself, and of Stangerson, Kemball, Johnston, and Drebber, who were the four principal Elders.
On the farm thus acquired John Ferrier built himself a substantial log-house, which received so many additions in succeeding years that it grew into a roomy villa.
He was a man of a practical turn of mind, keen in his dealings and skilful with his hands. His iron constitution enabled him to work morning and evening at improving and tilling his lands.
From the great inland sea to the distant Wahsatch Mountains there was no name better known than that of John Ferrier.
He never gave reasons for this persistent refusal, but contented himself by resolutely and inflexibly adhering to his determination.
There were some who accused him of lukewarmness in his adopted religion, and others who put it down to greed of wealth and reluctance to incur expense.
Others, again, spoke of some early love affair, and of a fair-haired girl who had pined away on the shores of the Atlantic.
Whatever the reason, Ferrier remained strictly celibate. In every other respect he conformed to the religion of the young settlement, and gained the name of being an orthodox and straight-walking man.
As year succeeded to year she grew taller and stronger, her cheek more rudy, and her step more elastic.
So the bud blossomed into a flower, and the year which saw her father the richest of the farmers left her as fair a specimen of American girlhood as could be found in the whole Pacific slope.
It was not the father, however, who first discovered that the child had developed into the woman. It seldom is in such cases.
There are few who cannot recall that day and remember the one little incident which heralded the dawn of a new life.
In the case of Lucy Ferrier the occasion was serious enough in itself, apart from its future influence on her destiny and that of many besides.
It was a warm June morning, and the Latter Day Saints were as busy as the bees whose hive they have chosen for their emblem.
There, too, were droves of sheep and bullocks coming in from the outlying pasture lands, and trains of tired immigrants, men and horses equally weary of their interminable journey.
She had a commission from her father in the City, and was dashing in as she had done many a time before, with all the fearlessness of youth, thinking only of her task and how it was to be performed.
The travel-stained adventurers gazed after her in astonishment, and even the unemotional Indians, journeying in with their pelties, relaxed their accustomed stoicism as they marvelled at the beauty of the pale-faced maiden.
She had reached the outskirts of the city when she found the road blocked by a great drove of cattle, driven by a half-dozen wild-looking herdsmen from the plains.
In her impatience she endeavoured to pass this obstacle by pushing her horse into what appeared to be a gap.
Scarcely had she got fairly into it, however, before the beasts closed in behind her, and she found herself completely imbedded in the moving stream of fierce-eyed, long-horned bullocks.
Accustomed as she was to deal with cattle, she was not alarmed at her situation, but took advantage of every opportunity to urge her horse on in the hopes of pushing her way through the cavalcade.
Unfortunately the horns of one of the creatures, either by accident or design, came in violent contact with the flank of the mustang, and excited it to madness.
In an instant it reared up upon its hind legs with a snort of rage, and pranced and tossed in a way that would have unseated any but a most skilful rider.
The situation was full of peril. Every plunge of the excited horse brought it against the horns again, and goaded it to fresh madness.
It was all that the girl could do to keep herself in the saddle, yet a slip would mean a terrible death under the hoofs of the unwieldy and terrified animals.
At the same moment a sinewy brown hand caught the frightened horse by the curb, and forcing a way through the drove, soon brought her to the outskirts.
She looked up at his dark, fierce face, and laughed saucily. "I'm awful frightened," she said, naively; "whoever would have thought that Poncho would have been so scared by a lot of cows?"
"I guess you are the daughter of John Ferrier," he remarked, "I saw you ride down from his house. When you see him, ask him if he remembers the Jefferson Hopes of St. Louis.
"He has a good deal to thank you for, and so have I," she answered, "he's awful fond of me. If those cows had jumped on me he'd have never got over it."
You! Well, I don't see that it would make much matter to you, anyhow. You ain't even a friend of ours.
"There, I didn't mean that," she said; "of course, you are a friend now. You must come and see us. Now I must push along, or father won't trust me with his business any more.
"Good-bye," he answered, raising his broad sombrero, and bending over her little hand. She wheeled her mustang round, gave it a cut with her riding-whip, and darted away down the broad road in a rolling cloud of dust.
He had been as keen as any of them upon the business until this sudden incident had drawn his thoughts into another channel.
The sight of the fair young girl, as frank and wholesome as the Sierra breezes, had stirred his volcanic, untamed heart to its very depths.
The love which had sprung up in his heart was not the sudden, changeable fancy of a boy, but rather the wild, fierce passion of a man of strong will and imperious temper.
He had been accustomed to succeed in all that he undertook. He swore in his heart that he would not fail in this if human effort and human perseverance could render him successful.
He called on John Ferrier that night, and many times again, until his face was a familiar one at the farm-house.
John, cooped up in the valley, and absorbed in his work, had had little chance of learning the news of the outside world during the last twelve years.
All this Jefferson Hope was able to tell him, and in a style which interested Lucy as well as her father.
He had been a pioneer in California, and could narrate many a strange tale of fortunes made and fortunes lost in those wild, halcyon days.
He had been a scout too, and a trapper, a silver explorer, and a ranchman. Wherever stirring adventures were to be had, Jefferson Hope had been there in search of them.
Her honest father may not have observed these symptoms, but they were assuredly not thrown away upon the man who had won her affections.
It was a summer evening when he came galloping down the road and pulled up at the gate. She was at the doorway, and came down to meet him.
"I am off, Lucy," he said, taking her two hands in his, and gazing tenderly down into her face; "I won't ask you to come with me now, but will you be ready to come when I am here again?"
A couple of months at the outside. I will come and claim you then, my darling. There's no one who can stand between us.
He has given his consent, provided we get these mines working all right. I have no fear on that head.
"Oh, well; of course, if you and father have arranged it all, there's no more to be said," she whispered, with her cheek against his broad breast.
"Thank God!" he said, hoarsely, stooping and kissing her. "It is settled, then. The longer I stay, the harder it will be to go.
She stood at the gate, gazing after him until he vanished from her sight. Then she walked back into the house, the happiest girl in all Utah.
Yet her bright and happy face reconciled him to the arrangement more than any argument could have done.
He had always determined, deep down in his resolute heart, that nothing would ever induce him to allow his daughter to wed a Mormon.
Such a marriage he regarded as no marriage at all, but as a shame and a disgrace. Whatever he might think of the Mormon doctrines, upon that one point he was inflexible.
He had to seal his mouth on the subject, however, for to express an unorthodox opinion was a dangerous matter in those days in the Land of the Saints.
The victims of persecution had now turned persecutors on their own account, and persecutors of the most terrible description.
Not the Inquisition of Seville, nor the German Vehmgericht, nor the Secret Societies of Italy, were ever able to put a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast a cloud over the State of Utah.
Its invisibility, and the mystery which was attached to it, made this organization doubly terrible. It appeared to be omniscient and omnipotent, and yet was neither seen nor heard.
The man who held out against the Church vanished away, and none knew whither he had gone or what had befallen him.
His wife and his children awaited him at home, but no father ever returned to tell them how he had fared at the hands of his secret judges.
A rash word or a hasty act was followed by annihilation, and yet none knew what the nature might be of this terrible power which was suspended over them.
No wonder that men went about in fear and trembling, and that even in the heart of the wilderness they dared not whisper the doubts which oppressed them.
At first this vague and terrible power was exercised only upon the recalcitrants who, having embraced the Mormon faith, wished afterwards to pervert or to abandon it.
Soon, however, it took a wider range. The supply of adult women was running short, and polygamy without a female population on which to draw was a barren doctrine indeed.
Strange rumours began to be bandied about-rumours of murdered immigrants and rifled camps in regions where Indians had never been seen.
Fresh women appeared in the harems of the Elders-women who pined and wept, and bore upon their faces the traces of an unextinguishable horror.
Belated wanderers upon the mountains spoke of gangs of armed men, masked, stealthy, and noiseless, who flitted by them in the darkness.
These tales and rumours took substance and shape, and were corroborated and re-corroborated, until they resolved themselves into a definite name.
To this day, in the lonely ranches of the West, the name of the Danite Band, or the Avenging Angels, is a sinister and an ill-omened one.
Fuller knowledge of the organization which produced such terrible results served to increase rather than to lessen the horror which it inspired in the minds of men.
None knew who belonged to this ruthless society. The names of the participators in the deeds of blood and violence done under the name of religion were kept profoundly secret.
The very friend to whom you communicated your misgivings as to the Prophet and his mission, might be one of those who would come forth at night with fire and sword to exact a terrible reparation.
The latter, however, received his salutations coldly, and followed him with a stern face into the sitting-room.
"Brother Ferrier," he said, taking a seat, and eyeing the farmer keenly from under his light-coloured eyelashes, "the true believers have been good friends to you.
In return for all this we asked but one condition: that was, that you should embrace the true faith, and conform in every way to its usages.
"And how have I neglected it?" asked Ferrier, throwing out his hands in expostulation. "Have I not given to the common fund?
"It is true that I have not married," Ferrier answered. "But women were few, and there were many who had better claims than I. I was not a lonely man: I had my daughter to attend to my wants."
"It is of that daughter that I would speak to you," said the leader of the Mormons. "She has grown to be the flower of Utah, and has found favour in the eyes of many who are high in the land."
There are stories of her which I would fain disbelieve-stories that she is sealed to some Gentile. This must be the gossip of idle tongues.
What is the thirteenth rule in the code of the sainted Joseph Smith? 'Let every maiden of the true faith marry one of the elect; for if she wed a Gentile, she commits a grievous sin.'
This being so, it is impossible that you, who profess the holy creed, should suffer your daughter to violate it.
Upon this one point your whole faith shall be tested-so it has been decided in the Sacred Council of Four.
The girl is young, and we would not have her wed grey hairs, neither would we deprive her of all choice.
"You will give us time," he said at last. "My daughter is very young-she is scarce of an age to marry."
"She shall have a month to choose," said Young, rising from his seat. "At the end of that time she shall give her answer."
He was passing through the door, when he turned, with flushed face and flashing eyes. "It were better for you, John Ferrier," he thundered, "that you and she were now lying blanched skeletons upon the Sierra Blanco, than that you should put your weak wills against the orders of the Holy Four!"
With a threatening gesture of his hand, he turned from the door, and Ferrier heard his heavy step scrunching along the shingly path.
He was still sitting with his elbows upon his knees, considering how he should broach the matter to his daughter when a soft hand was laid upon his, and looking up, he saw her standing beside him.
"I could not help it," she said, in answer to his look. "His voice rang through the house. Oh, father, father, what shall we do?"
"Don't you scare yourself," he answered, drawing her to him, and passing his broad, rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair.
We'll fix it up somehow or another. You don't find your fancy kind o' lessening for this chap, do you?
No; of course not. I shouldn't care to hear you say you did. He's a likely lad, and he's a Christian, which is more than these folk here, in spite o' all their praying and preaching.
There's a party starting for Nevada to-morrow, and I'll manage to send him a message letting him know the hole we are in.
If I know anything o' that young man, he'll be back here with a speed that would whip electro-telegraphs.
When he comes, he will advise us for the best. But it is for you that I am frightened, dear. One hears-one hears such dreadful stories about those who oppose the Prophet: something terrible always happens to them.
"But we haven't opposed him yet," her father answered. "It will be time to look out for squalls when we do.
We will raise as much as we can in money, and let the rest go. To tell the truth, Lucy, it isn't the first time I have thought of doing it.
I don't care about knuckling under to any man, as these folk do to their darned prophet. I'm a free-born American, and it's all new to me.
Guess I'm too old to learn. If he comes browsing about this farm, he might chance to run up against a charge of buckshot travelling in the opposite direction.
Wait till Jefferson comes, and we'll soon manage that. In the meantime, don't you fret yourself, my dearie, and don't get your eyes swelled up, else he'll be walking into me when he sees you.
John Ferrier uttered these consoling remarks in a very confident tone, but she could not help observing that he paid unusual care to the fastening of the doors that night, and that he carefully cleaned and loaded the rusty old shotgun which hung upon the wall of his bedroom.
In it he told the young man of the imminent danger which threatened them, and how necessary it was that he should return.
As he approached his farm, he was surprised to see a horse hitched to each of the posts of the gate. Still more surprised was he on entering to find two young men in possession of his sitting-room.
One, with a long pale face, was leaning back in the rocking-chair, with his feet cocked up upon the stove.
The other, a bull-necked youth with coarse bloated features, was standing in front of the window with his hands in his pocket, whistling a popular hymn.
Both of them nodded to Ferrier as he entered, and the one in the rocking-chair commenced the conversation.
"Maybe you don't know us," he said. "This here is the son of Elder Drebber, and I'm Joseph Stangerson, who travelled with you in the desert when the Lord stretched out His hand and gathered you into the true fold."
"As He will all the nations in His own good time," said the other in a nasal voice; "He grindeth slowly but exceeding small."
"We have come," continued Stangerson, "at the advice of our fathers to solicit the hand of your daughter for whichever of us may seem good to you and to her.
As I have but four wives and Brother Drebber here has seven, it appears to me that my claim is the stronger one.
"Nay, nay, Brother Stangerson," cried the other; "the question is not how many wives we have, but how many we can keep.
"But my prospects are better," said the other, warmly. "When the Lord removes my father, I shall have his tanning yard and his leather factory.
"It will be for the maiden to decide," rejoined young Drebber, smirking at his own reflection in the glass.
During this dialogue, John Ferrier had stood fuming in the doorway, hardly able to keep his riding-whip from the backs of his two visitors.
"Look here," he said at last, striding up to them, "when my daughter summons you, you can come, but until then I don't want to see your faces again."
The two young Mormons stared at him in amazement. In their eyes this competition between them for the maiden's hand was the highest of honours both to her and her father.
"There are two ways out of the room," cried Ferrier; "there is the door, and there is the window. Which do you care to use?"
His brown face looked so savage, and his gaunt hands so threatening, that his visitors sprang to their feet and beat a hurried retreat.
"You shall smart for this!" Stangerson cried, white with rage. "You have defied the Prophet and the Council of Four.
"Then I'll start the smiting," exclaimed Ferrier furiously, and would have rushed upstairs for his gun had not Lucy seized him by the arm and restrained him.
Before he could escape from her, the clatter of horses' hoofs told him that they were beyond his reach.
"The young canting rascals!" he exclaimed, wiping the perspiration from his forehead; "I would sooner see you in your grave, my girl, than the wife of either of them."
Yes. It will not be long before he comes. The sooner the better, for we do not know what their next move may be.
It was, indeed, high time that someone capable of giving advice and help should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopted daughter.
In the whole history of the settlement there had never been such a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the Elders.
If minor errors were punished so sternly, what would be the fate of this arch rebel. Ferrier knew that his wealth and position would be of no avail to him.
Others as well known and as rich as himself had been spirited away before now, and their goods given over to the Church.
He was a brave man, but he trembled at the vague, shadowy terrors which hung over him. Any known danger he could face with a firm lip, but this suspense was unnerving.
He concealed his fears from his daughter, however, and affected to make light of the whole matter, though she, with the keen eye of love, saw plainly that he was ill at ease.
He expected that he would receive some message or remonstrance from Young as to his conduct, and he was not mistaken, though it came in an unlooked-for manner.
Upon rising next morning he found, to his surprise, a small square of paper pinned on to the coverlet of his bed just over his chest.
He crumpled the paper up and said nothing to his daughter, but the incident struck a chill into his heart.
The twenty-nine days were evidently the balance of the month which Young had promised. What strength or courage could avail against an enemy armed with such mysterious powers?
The hand which fastened that pin might have struck him to the heart, and he could never have known who had slain him.
Still more shaken was he next morning. They had sat down to their breakfast when Lucy with a cry of surprise pointed upwards.
In the centre of the ceiling was scrawled, with a burned stick apparently, the number 28. To his daughter it was unintelligible, and he did not enlighten her.
That night he sat up with his gun and kept watch and ward. He saw and he heard nothing, and yet in the morning a great 27 had been painted upon the outside of his door.
Sometimes the fatal numbers appeared upon the walls, sometimes upon the floors, occasionally they were on small placards stuck upon the garden gate or the railings.
With all his vigilance John Ferrier could not discover whence these daily warnings proceeded. A horror which was almost superstitious came upon him at the sight of them.
He became haggard and restless, and his eyes had the troubled look of some hunted creature. He had but one hope in life now, and that was for the arrival of the young hunter from Nevada.
Twenty had changed to fifteen and fifteen to ten, but there was no news of the absentee. One by one the numbers dwindled down, and still there came no sign of him.
Whenever a horseman clattered down the road, or a driver shouted at his team, the old farmer hurried to the gate thinking that help had arrived at last.
At last, when he saw five give way to four and that again to three, he lost heart, and abandoned all hope of escape.
Single-handed, and with his limited knowledge of the mountains which surrounded the settlement, he knew that he was powerless.
The more-frequented roads were strictly watched and guarded, and none could pass along them without an order from the Council.
Turn which way he would, there appeared to be no avoiding the blow which hung over him. Yet the old man never wavered in his resolution to part with life itself before he consented to what he regarded as his daughter's dishonour.
He was sitting alone one evening pondering deeply over his troubles, and searching vainly for some way out of them.
That morning had shown the figure 2 upon the wall of his house, and the next day would be the last of the allotted time.
What was to happen then? All manner of vague and terrible fancies filled his imagination. And his daughter-what was to become of her after he was gone?
Was there no escape from the invisible network which was drawn all round them. He sank his head upon the table and sobbed at the thought of his own impotence.
What was that? In the silence he heard a gentle scratching sound-low, but very distinct in the quiet of the night.
It came from the door of the house. Ferrier crept into the hall and listened intently. There was a pause for a few moments, and then the low insidious sound was repeated.
Someone was evidently tapping very gently upon one of the panels of the door. Was it some midnight assassin who had come to carry out the murderous orders of the secret tribunal?
Or was it some agent who was marking up that the last day of grace had arrived. John Ferrier felt that instant death would be better than the suspense which shook his nerves and chilled his heart.
With a sigh of relief, Ferrier looked to right and to left, until happening to glance straight down at his own feet he saw to his astonishment a man lying flat upon his face upon the ground, with arms and legs all asprawl.
So unnerved was he at the sight that he leaned up against the wall with his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out.
Once within the house the man sprang to his feet, closed the door, and revealed to the astonished farmer the fierce face and resolute expression of Jefferson Hope.
"Give me food," the other said, hoarsely. "I have had no time for bite or sup for eight-and-forty hours."
He flung himself upon the cold meat and bread which were still lying upon the table from his host's supper, and devoured it voraciously.
That is well. The house is watched on every side. That is why I crawled my way up to it. They may be darned sharp, but they're not quite sharp enough to catch a Washoe hunter.
John Ferrier felt a different man now that he realized that he had a devoted ally. He seized the young man's leathery hand and wrung it cordially.
"You're a man to be proud of," he said. "There are not many who would come to share our danger and our troubles."
"You've hit it there, pard," the young hunter answered. "I have a respect for you, but if you were alone in this business I'd think twice before I put my head into such a hornet's nest.
It's Lucy that brings me here, and before harm comes on her I guess there will be one less o' the Hope family in Utah.
To-morrow is your last day, and unless you act to-night you are lost. I have a mule and two horses waiting in the Eagle Ravine.
That will do. I have as much more to add to it. We must push for Carson City through the mountains. You had best wake Lucy.
He had hardly completed his arrangements before the farmer returned with his daughter all dressed and ready for a start.
The greeting between the lovers was warm, but brief, for minutes were precious, and there was much to be done.
"We must make our start at once," said Jefferson Hope, speaking in a low but resolute voice, like one who realizes the greatness of the peril, but has steeled his heart to meet it.
The front and back entrances are watched, but with caution we may get away through the side window and across the fields.
Once on the road we are only two miles from the Ravine where the horses are waiting. By daybreak we should be half-way through the mountains.
Hope slapped the revolver butt which protruded from the front of his tunic. "If they are too many for us we shall take two or three of them with us," he said with a sinister smile.
The lights inside the house had all been extinguished, and from the darkened window Ferrier peered over the fields which had been his own, and which he was now about to abandon for ever.
He had long nerved himself to the sacrifice, however, and the thought of the honour and happiness of his daughter outweighed any regret at his ruined fortunes.
All looked so peaceful and happy, the rustling trees and the broad silent stretch of grain-land, that it was difficult to realize that the spirit of murder lurked through it all.
Yet the white face and set expression of the young hunter showed that in his approach to the house he had seen enough to satisfy him upon that head.
Ferrier carried the bag of gold and notes, Jefferson Hope had the scanty provisions and water, while Lucy had a small bundle containing a few of her more valued possessions.
Opening the window very slowly and carefully, they waited until a dark cloud had somewhat obscured the night, and then one by one passed through into the little garden.
With bated breath and crouching figures they stumbled across it, and gained the shelter of the hedge, which they skirted until they came to the gap which opened into the cornfields.
They had just reached this point when the young man seized his two companions and dragged them down into the shadow, where they lay silent and trembling.
At the same moment a vague shadowy figure emerged from the gap for which they had been making, and uttered the plaintive signal cry again, on which a second man appeared out of the obscurity.
"To-morrow at midnight," said the first who appeared to be in authority. "When the Whip-poor-Will calls three times."
"Seven to five!" repeated the other, and the two figures flitted away in different directions. Their concluding words had evidently been some form of sign and countersign.
The instant that their footsteps had died away in the distance, Jefferson Hope sprang to his feet, and helping his companions through the gap, led the way across the fields at the top of his speed, supporting and half-carrying the girl when her strength appeared to fail her.
"Hurry on! hurry on!" he gasped from time to time. "We are through the line of sentinels. Everything depends on speed.
Once on the high road they made rapid progress. Only once did they meet anyone, and then they managed to slip into a field, and so avoid recognition.
Before reaching the town the hunter branched away into a rugged and narrow footpath which led to the mountains.
The girl was placed upon the mule, and old Ferrier upon one of the horses, with his money-bag, while Jefferson Hope led the other along the precipitous and dangerous path.
Yet in spite of all dangers and difficulties, the hearts of the fugitives were light within them, for every step increased the distance between them and the terrible despotism from which they were flying.
On a rock which overlooked the track, showing out dark and plain against the sky, there stood a solitary sentinel.
He saw them as soon as they perceived him, and his military challenge of "Who goes there?" rang through the silent ravine.
They could see the lonely watcher fingering his gun, and peering down at them as if dissatisfied at their reply.
"The Holy Four," answered Ferrier. His Mormon experiences had taught him that that was the highest authority to which he could refer.
"Seven from five," returned Jefferson Hope promptly, remembering the countersign which he had heard in the garden.
"Pass, and the Lord go with you," said the voice from above. Beyond his post the path broadened out, and the horses were able to break into a trot.
Looking back, they could see the solitary watcher leaning upon his gun, and knew that they had passed the outlying post of the chosen people, and that freedom lay before them.
When morning broke, a scene of marvellous though savage beauty lay before them. In every direction the great snow-capped peaks hemmed them in, peeping over each other's shoulders to the far horizon.
So steep were the rocky banks on either side of them, that the larch and the pine seemed to be suspended over their heads, and to need only a gust of wind to come hurtling down upon them.
Nor was the fear entirely an illusion, for the barren valley was thickly strewn with trees and boulders which had fallen in a similar manner.
Even as they passed, a great rock came thundering down with a hoarse rattle which woke the echoes in the silent gorges, and startled the weary horses into a gallop.
As the sun rose slowly above the eastern horizon, the caps of the great mountains lit up one after the other, like lamps at a festival, until they were all ruddy and glowing.
Lucy and her father would fain have rested longer, but Jefferson Hope was inexorable. "They will be upon our track by this time," he said.
During the whole of that day they struggled on through the defiles, and by evening they calculated that they were more than thirty miles from their enemies.
At night-time they chose the base of a beetling crag, where the rocks offered some protection from the chill wind, and there huddled together for warmth, they enjoyed a few hours' sleep.
He little knew how far that iron grasp could reach, or how soon it was to close upon them and crush them.
About the middle of the second day of their flight their scanty store of provisions began to run out.
This gave the hunter little uneasiness, however, for there was game to be had among the mountains, and he had frequently before had to depend upon his rifle for the needs of life.
Having tethered the horses, and bade Lucy adieu, he threw his gun over his shoulder, and set out in search of whatever chance might throw in his way.
Looking back he saw the old man and the young girl crouching over the blazing fire, while the three animals stood motionless in the back-ground.
At last, after two or three hours' fruitless search, he was thinking of turning back in despair, when casting his eyes upwards he saw a sight which sent a thrill of pleasure through his heart.
On the edge of a jutting pinnacle, three or four hundred feet above him, there stood a creature somewhat resembling a sheep in appearance, but armed with a pair of gigantic horns.
Lying on his face, he rested his rifle upon a rock, and took a long and steady aim before drawing the trigger.
The animal sprang into the air, tottered for a moment upon the edge of the precipice, and then came crashing down into the valley beneath.
The creature was too unwieldy to lift, so the hunter contented himself with cutting away one haunch and part of the flank.
With this trophy over his shoulder, he hastened to retrace his steps, for the evening was already drawing in.
The valley in which he found himself divided and sub-divided into many gorges, which were so like each other that it was impossible to distinguish one from the other.
He followed one for a mile or more until he came to a mountain torrent which he was sure that he had never seen before.
Even then it was no easy matter to keep to the right track, for the moon had not yet risen, and the high cliffs on either side made the obscurity more profound.
Weighed down with his burden, and weary from his exertions, he stumbled along, keeping up his heart by the reflection that every step brought him nearer to Lucy, and that he carried with him enough to ensure them food for the remainder of their journey.
He had now come to the mouth of the very defile in which he had left them. Even in the darkness he could recognize the outline of the cliffs which bounded it.
He paused and listened for an answer. None came save his own cry, which clattered up the dreary silent ravines, and was borne back to his ears in countless repetitions.
Again he shouted, even louder than before, and again no whisper came back from the friends whom he had left such a short time ago.
A vague, nameless dread came over him, and he hurried onwards frantically, dropping the precious food in his agitation.
When he turned the corner, he came full in sight of the spot where the fire had been lit. There was still a glowing pile of wood ashes there, but it had evidently not been tended since his departure.
The same dead silence still reigned all round. With his fears all changed to convictions, he hurried on.
There was no living creature near the remains of the fire: animals, man, maiden, all were gone. It was only too clear that some sudden and terrible disaster had occurred during his absence-a disaster which had embraced them all, and yet had left no traces behind it.
Bewildered and stunned by this blow, Jefferson Hope felt his head spin round, and had to lean upon his rifle to save himself from falling.
A little way on one side of the camp was a low-lying heap of reddish soil, which had assuredly not been there before.
There was no mistaking it for anything but a newly-dug grave. As the young hunter approached it, he perceived that a stick had been planted on it, with a sheet of paper stuck in the cleft fork of it.
The sturdy old man, whom he had left so short a time before, was gone, then, and this was all his epitaph.
As the young fellow realized the certainty of her fate, and his own powerlessness to prevent it, he wished that he, too, was lying with the old farmer in his last silent resting-place.
Again, however, his active spirit shook off the lethargy which springs from despair. If there was nothing else left to him, he could at least devote his life to revenge.
With indomitable patience and perseverance, Jefferson Hope possessed also a power of sustained vindictiveness, which he may have learned from the Indians amongst whom he had lived.
As he stood by the desolate fire, he felt that the only one thing which could assuage his grief would be thorough and complete retribution, brought by his own hand upon his enemies.
This he made up into a bundle, and, tired as he was, he set himself to walk back through the mountains upon the track of the avenging angels.
For five days he toiled footsore and weary through the defiles which he had already traversed on horseback.
At night he flung himself down among the rocks, and snatched a few hours of sleep; but before daybreak he was always well on his way.
Worn and exhausted, he leaned upon his rifle and shook his gaunt hand fiercely at the silent widespread city beneath him.
As he looked at it, he observed that there were flags in some of the principal streets, and other signs of festivity.
He was still speculating as to what this might mean when he heard the clatter of horse's hoofs, and saw a mounted man riding towards him.
As he approached, he recognized him as a Mormon named Cowper, to whom he had rendered services at different times.
He therefore accosted him when he got up to him, with the object of finding out what Lucy Ferrier's fate had been.
Having, however, at last, satisfied himself as to his identity, the man's surprise changed to consternation.
"You are mad to come here," he cried. "It is as much as my own life is worth to be seen talking with you.
"I don't fear them, or their warrant," Hope said, earnestly. "You must know something of this matter, Cowper.
I conjure you by everything you hold dear to answer a few questions. We have always been friends. For God's sake, don't refuse to answer me.
"Don't mind me," said Hope faintly. He was white to the very lips, and had sunk down on the stone against which he had been leaning.
Married yesterday-that's what those flags are for on the Endowment House. There was some words between young Drebber and young Stangerson as to which was to have her.
No one won't have her very long though, for I saw death in her face yesterday. She is more like a ghost than a woman.
"Yes, I am off," said Jefferson Hope, who had risen from his seat. His face might have been chiselled out of marble, so hard and set was its expression, while its eyes glowed with a baleful light.
"Never mind," he answered; and, slinging his weapon over his shoulder, strode off down the gorge and so away into the heart of the mountains to the haunts of the wild beasts.
Without a glance or a word to the cowering women, he walked up to the white silent figure which had once contained the pure soul of Lucy Ferrier.
Stooping over her, he pressed his lips reverently to her cold forehead, and then, snatching up her hand, he took the wedding-ring from her finger.
"She shall not be buried in that," he cried with a fierce snarl, and before an alarm could be raised sprang down the stairs and was gone.
So strange and so brief was the episode, that the watchers might have found it hard to believe it themselves or persuade other people of it, had it not been for the undeniable fact that the circlet of gold which marked her as having been a bride had disappeared.
For some months Jefferson Hope lingered among the mountains, leading a strange wild life, and nursing in his heart the fierce desire for vengeance which possessed him.
Tales were told in the City of the weird figure which was seen prowling about the suburbs, and which haunted the lonely mountain gorges.
Once a bullet whistled through Stangerson's window and flattened itself upon the wall within a foot of him.
On another occasion, as Drebber passed under a cliff a great boulder crashed down on him, and he only escaped a terrible death by throwing himself upon his face.
Then they adopted the precaution of never going out alone or after nightfall, and of having their houses guarded.
After a time they were able to relax these measures, for nothing was either heard or seen of their opponent, and they hoped that time had cooled his vindictiveness.
He was, however, above all things practical. He soon realized that even his iron constitution could not stand the incessant strain which he was putting upon it.
Exposure and want of wholesome food were wearing him out. If he died like a dog among the mountains, what was to become of his revenge then?
And yet such a death was sure to overtake him if he persisted. He felt that that was to play his enemy's game, so he reluctantly returned to the old Nevada mines, there to recruit his health and to amass money enough to allow him to pursue his object without privation.
His intention had been to be absent a year at the most, but a combination of unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving the mines for nearly five.
At the end of that time, however, his memory of his wrongs and his craving for revenge were quite as keen as on that memorable night when he had stood by John Ferrier's grave.
Disguised, and under an assumed name, he returned to Salt Lake City, careless what became of his own life, as long as he obtained what he knew to be justice.
Many a man, however vindictive, would have abandoned all thought of revenge in the face of such a difficulty, but Jefferson Hope never faltered for a moment.
With the small competence he possessed, eked out by such employment as he could pick up, he travelled from town to town through the United States in quest of his enemies.
Year passed into year, his black hair turned grizzled, but still he wandered on, a human bloodhound, with his mind wholly set upon the one object upon which he had devoted his life.
At last his perseverance was rewarded. It was but a glance of a face in a window, but that one glance told him that Cleveland in Ohio possessed the men whom he was in pursuit of.
That evening Jefferson Hope was taken into custody, and not being able to find sureties, was detained for some weeks.
When at last he was liberated, it was only to find that Drebber's house was deserted, and that he and his secretary had departed for Europe.
Again the avenger had been foiled, and again his concentrated hatred urged him to continue the pursuit.
Funds were wanting, however, and for some time he had to return to work, saving every dollar for his approaching journey.
At last, having collected enough to keep life in him, he departed for Europe, and tracked his enemies from city to city, working his way in any menial capacity, but never overtaking the fugitives.
When he reached St. Petersburg they had departed for Paris; and when he followed them there he learned that they had just set off for Copenhagen.
At the Danish capital he was again a few days late, for they had journeyed on to London, where he at last succeeded in running them to earth.
As to what occurred there, we cannot do better than quote the old hunter's own account, as duly recorded in Dr. Watson's Journal, to which we are already under such obligations.
"I guess you're going to take me to the police-station," he remarked to Sherlock Holmes. "My cab's at the door.
He rose and stretched his legs, as though to assure himself that they were free once more. I remember that I thought to myself, as I eyed him, that I had seldom seen a more powerfully built man; and his dark sunburned face bore an expression of determination and energy which was as formidable as his personal strength.
"If there's a vacant place for a chief of the police, I reckon you are the man for it," he said, gazing with undisguised admiration at my fellow-lodger.
Good! and Gregson can come inside with me. You too, Doctor, you have taken an interest in the case and may as well stick to us.
I assented gladly, and we all descended together. Our prisoner made no attempt at escape, but stepped calmly into the cab which had been his, and we followed him.
Lestrade mounted the box, whipped up the horse, and brought us in a very short time to our destination.
We were ushered into a small chamber where a police Inspector noted down our prisoner's name and the names of the men with whose murder he had been charged.
The official was a white-faced unemotional man, who went through his duties in a dull mechanical way.
"The prisoner will be put before the magistrates in the course of the week," he said; "in the mean time, Mr. Jefferson Hope, have you anything that you wish to say?
"I've got a good deal to say," our prisoner said slowly. "I want to tell you gentlemen all about it."
"I may never be tried," he answered. "You needn't look startled. It isn't suicide I am thinking of. Are you a Doctor?"
"Then put your hand here," he said, with a smile, motioning with his manacled wrists towards his chest.
I did so; and became at once conscious of an extraordinary throbbing and commotion which was going on inside.
The walls of his chest seemed to thrill and quiver as a frail building would do inside when some powerful engine was at work.
In the silence of the room I could hear a dull humming and buzzing noise which proceeded from the same source.
"That's what they call it," he said, placidly. "I went to a Doctor last week about it, and he told me that it is bound to burst before many days passed.
It has been getting worse for years. I got it from over-exposure and under-feeding among the Salt Lake Mountains.
I've done my work now, and I don't care how soon I go, but I should like to leave some account of the business behind me.
The Inspector and the two detectives had a hurried discussion as to the advisability of allowing him to tell his story.
"In that case it is clearly our duty, in the interests of justice, to take his statement," said the Inspector.
"I'll sit down, with your leave," the prisoner said, suiting the action to the word. "This aneurism of mine makes me easily tired, and the tussle we had half an hour ago has not mended matters.
I'm on the brink of the grave, and I am not likely to lie to you. Every word I say is the absolute truth, and how you use it is a matter of no consequence to me.
With these words, Jefferson Hope leaned back in his chair and began the following remarkable statement.
He spoke in a calm and methodical manner, as though the events which he narrated were commonplace enough.
I can vouch for the accuracy of the subjoined account, for I have had access to Lestrade's note-book, in which the prisoner's words were taken down exactly as they were uttered.
He walked down the road and went into one or two liquor shops, staying for nearly half-an-hour in the last of them.
When he came out he staggered in his walk, and was evidently pretty well on. There was a hansom just in front of me, and he hailed it.
I could not imagine what his intention was in returning there; but I went on and pulled up my cab a hundred yards or so from the house.
He entered it, and his hansom drove away. Give me a glass of water, if you please. My mouth gets dry with the talking.
I have little more to say, and it's as well, for I am about done up. I went on cabbing it for a day or so, intending to keep at it until I could save enough to take me back to America.
I was standing in the yard when a ragged youngster asked if there was a cabby there called Jefferson Hope, and said that his cab was wanted by a gentleman at 221B, Baker Street.
I went round, suspecting no harm, and the next thing I knew, this young man here had the bracelets on my wrists, and as neatly shackled as ever I saw in my life.
That's the whole of my story, gentlemen. You may consider me to be a murderer; but I hold that I am just as much an officer of justice as you are.
So thrilling had the man's narrative been, and his manner was so impressive that we had sat silent and absorbed.
When he finished we sat for some minutes in a stillness which was only broken by the scratching of Lestrade's pencil as he gave the finishing touches to his shorthand account.
"There is only one point on which I should like a little more information," Sherlock Holmes said at last.
The prisoner winked at my friend jocosely. "I can tell my own secrets," he said, "but I don't get other people into trouble.
I saw your advertisement, and I thought it might be a plant, or it might be the ring which I wanted. My friend volunteered to go and see.
"Now, gentlemen," the Inspector remarked gravely, "the forms of the law must be complied with. On Thursday the prisoner will be brought before the magistrates, and your attendance will be required.
Until then I will be responsible for him." He rang the bell as he spoke, and Jefferson Hope was led off by a couple of warders, while my friend and I made our way out of the Station and took a cab back to Baker Street.
We had all been warned to appear before the magistrates upon the Thursday; but when the Thursday came there was no occasion for our testimony.
A higher Judge had taken the matter in hand, and Jefferson Hope had been summoned before a tribunal where strict justice would be meted out to him.
On the very night after his capture the aneurism burst, and he was found in the morning stretched upon the floor of the cell, with a placid smile upon his face, as though he had been able in his dying moments to look back upon a useful life, and on work well done.
"Gregson and Lestrade will be wild about his death," Holmes remarked, as we chatted it over next evening.
"What you do in this world is a matter of no consequence," returned my companion, bitterly. "The question is, what can you make people believe that you have done.
Never mind," he continued, more brightly, after a pause. "I would not have missed the investigation for anything.
There has been no better case within my recollection. Simple as it was, there were several most instructive points about it.
"Well, really, it can hardly be described as otherwise," said Sherlock Holmes, smiling at my surprise.
The proof of its intrinsic simplicity is, that without any help save a few very ordinary deductions I was able to lay my hand upon the criminal within three days.
I have already explained to you that what is out of the common is usually a guide rather than a hindrance.
In solving a problem of this sort, the grand thing is to be able to reason backwards. That is a very useful accomplishment, and a very easy one, but people do not practise it much.
In the every-day affairs of life it is more useful to reason forwards, and so the other comes to be neglected.
I hardly expected that you would. Let me see if I can make it clearer. Most people, if you describe a train of events to them, will tell you what the result would be.
They can put those events together in their minds, and argue from them that something will come to pass.
There are few people, however, who, if you told them a result, would be able to evolve from their own inner consciousness what the steps were which led up to that result.
If he had been one there was no reason to believe that he had ceased to be. On the contrary, from his point of view, any sudden change would be likely to draw attention to himself.
He would, probably, for a time at least, continue to perform his duties. There was no reason to suppose that he was going under an assumed name.
How well they succeeded, and how quickly I took advantage of it, are still fresh in your recollection.
The murder of Stangerson was an incident which was entirely unexpected, but which could hardly in any case have been prevented.
Through it, as you know, I came into possession of the pills, the existence of which I had already surmised.
"It is wonderful!" I cried. "Your merits should be publicly recognized. You should publish an account of the case.
"You may do what you like, Doctor," he answered. "See here!" he continued, handing a paper over to me, "look at this!"
It was the Echo for the day, and the paragraph to which he pointed was devoted to the case in question.
"The public," it said, "have lost a sensational treat through the sudden death of the man Hope, who was suspected of the murder of Mr. Enoch Drebber and of Mr. Joseph Stangerson.
It seems that both the victims belonged, in their younger days, to the Latter Day Saints, and Hope, the deceased prisoner, hails also from Salt Lake City.
It is an open secret that the credit of this smart capture belongs entirely to the well-known Scotland Yard officials, Messrs. Lestrade and Gregson.
It is expected that a testimonial of some sort will be presented to the two officers as a fitting recognition of their services.
"Didn't I tell you so when we started?" cried Sherlock Holmes with a laugh. "That's the result of all our Study in Scarlet: to get them a testimonial!"
Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who was usually very late in the mornings, save upon those not infrequent occasions when he was up all night, was seated at the breakfast table.
I stood upon the hearth-rug and picked up the stick which our visitor had left behind him the night before.
It was a fine, thick piece of wood, bulbous-headed, of the sort which is known as a "Penang lawyer." Just under the head was a broad silver band nearly an inch across.
"To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of the C.C.H.," was engraved upon it, with the date "1884."
It was just such a stick as the old-fashioned family practitioner used to carry-dignified, solid, and reassuring.
"I have, at least, a well-polished, silver-plated coffee-pot in front of me," said he. "But, tell me, Watson, what do you make of our visitor's stick?
Since we have been so unfortunate as to miss him and have no notion of his errand, this accidental souvenir becomes of importance.
"I think," said I, following as far as I could the methods of my companion, "that Dr. Mortimer is a successful, elderly medical man, well-esteemed since those who know him give him this mark of their appreciation."
I think also that the probability is in favour of his being a country practitioner who does a great deal of his visiting on foot.
Because this stick, though originally a very handsome one has been so knocked about that I can hardly imagine a town practitioner carrying it.
The thick-iron ferrule is worn down, so it is evident that he has done a great amount of walking with it.
And then again, there is the 'friends of the C.C.H.' I should guess that to be the Something Hunt, the local hunt to whose members he has possibly given some surgical assistance, and which has made him a small presentation in return.
It may be that you are not yourself luminous, but you are a conductor of light. Some people without possessing genius have a remarkable power of stimulating it.
I was proud, too, to think that I had so far mastered his system as to apply it in a way which earned his approval.
He now took the stick from my hands and examined it for a few minutes with his naked eyes. Then with an expression of interest he laid down his cigarette, and carrying the cane to the window, he looked over it again with a convex lens.
"Interesting, though elementary," said he as he returned to his favourite corner of the settee. "There are certainly one or two indications upon the stick.
"Has anything escaped me?" I asked with some self-importance. "I trust that there is nothing of consequence which I have overlooked?"
Not that you are entirely wrong in this instance. The man is certainly a country practitioner. And he walks a good deal.
The probability lies in that direction. And if we take this as a working hypothesis we have a fresh basis from which to start our construction of this unknown visitor.
Well, then, supposing that 'C.C.H.' does stand for 'Charing Cross Hospital,' what further inferences may we draw?
I can only think of the obvious conclusion that the man has practised in town before going to the country.
I think that we might venture a little farther than this. Look at it in this light. On what occasion would it be most probable that such a presentation would be made?
When would his friends unite to give him a pledge of their good will? Obviously at the moment when Dr. Mortimer withdrew from the service of the hospital in order to start a practice for himself.
We know there has been a presentation. We believe there has been a change from a town hospital to a country practice.
Is it, then, stretching our inference too far to say that the presentation was on the occasion of the change?
What was he, then? If he was in the hospital and yet not on the staff he could only have been a house-surgeon or a house-physician-little more than a senior student.
And he left five years ago-the date is on the stick. So your grave, middle-aged family practitioner vanishes into thin air, my dear Watson, and there emerges a young fellow under thirty, amiable, unambitious, absent-minded, and the possessor of a favourite dog, which I should describe roughly as being larger than a terrier and smaller than a mastiff.
I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his settee and blew little wavering rings of smoke up to the ceiling.
"As to the latter part, I have no means of checking you," said I, "but at least it is not difficult to find out a few particulars about the man's age and professional career."
From my small medical shelf I took down the Medical Directory and turned up the name. There were several Mortimers, but only one who could be our visitor.
Mortimer, James, M.R.C.S., 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor, Devon. House-surgeon, from 1882 to 1884, at Charing Cross Hospital.
Winner of the Jackson prize for Comparative Pathology, with essay entitled 'Is Disease a Reversion?' Corresponding member of the Swedish Pathological Society.
Author of 'Some Freaks of Atavism' (_Lancet_ 1882). 'Do We Progress?' (_Journal of Psychology_, March, 1883).
"No mention of that local hunt, Watson," said Holmes with a mischievous smile, "but a country doctor, as you very astutely observed.
I think that I am fairly justified in my inferences. As to the adjectives, I said, if I remember right, amiable, unambitious, and absent-minded.
It is my experience that it is only an amiable man in this world who receives testimonials, only an unambitious one who abandons a London career for the country, and only an absent-minded one who leaves his stick and not his visiting-card after waiting an hour in your room.
Has been in the habit of carrying this stick behind his master. Being a heavy stick the dog has held it tightly by the middle, and the marks of his teeth are very plainly visible.
The dog's jaw, as shown in the space between these marks, is too broad in my opinion for a terrier and not broad enough for a mastiff.
He had risen and paced the room as he spoke. Now he halted in the recess of the window. There was such a ring of conviction in his voice that I glanced up in surprise.
For the very simple reason that I see the dog himself on our very door-step, and there is the ring of its owner.
Don't move, I beg you, Watson. He is a professional brother of yours, and your presence may be of assistance to me.
The appearance of our visitor was a surprise to me, since I had expected a typical country practitioner.
He was a very tall, thin man, with a long nose like a beak, which jutted out between two keen, grey eyes, set closely together and sparkling brightly from behind a pair of gold-rimmed glasses.
He was clad in a professional but rather slovenly fashion, for his frock-coat was dingy and his trousers frayed.
Though young, his long back was already bowed, and he walked with a forward thrust of his head and a general air of peering benevolence.
As he entered his eyes fell upon the stick in Holmes's hand, and he ran towards it with an exclamation of joy.
"I am so very glad," said he. "I was not sure whether I had left it here or in the Shipping Office. I would not lose that stick for the world."
Yes, sir. I married, and so left the hospital, and with it all hopes of a consulting practice. It was necessary to make a home of my own.
A dabbler in science, Mr. Holmes, a picker up of shells on the shores of the great unknown ocean. I presume that it is Mr. Sherlock Holmes whom I am addressing and not-
Glad to meet you, sir. I have heard your name mentioned in connection with that of your friend. You interest me very much, Mr. Holmes.
I had hardly expected so dolichocephalic a skull or such well-marked supra-orbital development. Would you have any objection to my running my finger along your parietal fissure?
A cast of your skull, sir, until the original is available, would be an ornament to any anthropological museum.
Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair. "You are an enthusiast in your line of thought, I perceive, sir, as I am in mine," said he.
I observe from your forefinger that you make your own cigarettes. Have no hesitation in lighting one.
Holmes was silent, but his little darting glances showed me the interest which he took in our curious companion.
"I presume, sir," said he at last, "that it was not merely for the purpose of examining my skull that you have done me the honour to call here last night and again today?"
I said, sir, to the precisely scientific mind. But as a practical man of affairs it is acknowledged that you stand alone.
"Just a little," said Holmes. "I think, Dr. Mortimer, you would do wisely if without more ado you would kindly tell me plainly what the exact nature of the problem is in which you demand my assistance."
You have presented an inch or two of it to my examination all the time that you have been talking. It would be a poor expert who could not give the date of a document within a decade or so.
I may say that I was his personal friend as well as his medical attendant. He was a strong-minded man, sir, shrewd, practical, and as unimaginative as I am myself.
Yet he took this document very seriously, and his mind was prepared for just such an end as did eventually overtake him.
Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript and flattened it upon his knee. "You will observe, Watson, the alternative use of the long s and the short.
I looked over his shoulder at the yellow paper and the faded script. At the head was written: "Baskerville Hall," and below in large, scrawling figures: "1742."
Most modern. A most practical, pressing matter, which must be decided within twenty-four hours. But the manuscript is short and is intimately connected with the affair.
Holmes leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tips together, and closed his eyes, with an air of resignation.
Dr. Mortimer turned the manuscript to the light and read in a high, cracking voice the following curious, old-world narrative:
When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singular narrative he pushed his spectacles up on his forehead and stared across at Mr. Sherlock Holmes.
Now, Mr. Holmes, we will give you something a little more recent. This is the _Devon County Chronicle_ of May 14th of this year.
It is a short account of the facts elicited at the death of Sir Charles Baskerville which occurred a few days before that date.
My friend leaned a little forward and his expression became intent. Our visitor readjusted his glasses and began:
The facts of the case are simple. Sir Charles Baskerville was in the habit every night before going to bed of walking down the famous yew alley of Baskerville Hall.
That night he went out as usual for his nocturnal walk, in the course of which he was in the habit of smoking a cigar.
He never returned. At twelve o'clock Barrymore, finding the hall door still open, became alarmed, and, lighting a lantern, went in search of his master.
The day had been wet, and Sir Charles's footmarks were easily traced down the alley. Halfway down this walk there is a gate which leads out on to the moor.
There were indications that Sir Charles had stood for some little time here. He then proceeded down the alley, and it was at the far end of it that his body was discovered.
One Murphy, a gipsy horse-dealer, was on the moor at no great distance at the time, but he appears by his own confession to have been the worse for drink.
This explanation was borne out by the post-mortem examination, which showed long-standing organic disease, and the coroner's jury returned a verdict in accordance with the medical evidence.
It is well that this is so, for it is obviously of the utmost importance that Sir Charles's heir should settle at the Hall and continue the good work which has been so sadly interrupted.
It is understood that the next of kin is Mr. Henry Baskerville, if he be still alive, the son of Sir Charles Baskerville's younger brother.
The young man when last heard of was in America, and inquiries are being instituted with a view to informing him of his good fortune.
Dr. Mortimer refolded his paper and replaced it in his pocket. "Those are the public facts, Mr. Holmes, in connection with the death of Sir Charles Baskerville."
"I must thank you," said Sherlock Holmes, "for calling my attention to a case which certainly presents some features of interest.
"Then let me have the private ones." He leaned back, put his finger-tips together, and assumed his most impassive and judicial expression.
Sir Charles lay on his face, his arms out, his fingers dug into the ground, and his features convulsed with some strong emotion to such an extent that I could hardly have sworn to his identity.
There was certainly no physical injury of any kind. But one false statement was made by Barrymore at the inquest.
He said that there were no traces upon the ground round the body. He did not observe any. But I did-some little distance off, but fresh and clear.
Dr. Mortimer looked strangely at us for an instant, and his voice sank almost to a whisper as he answered.
I confess at these words a shudder passed through me. There was a thrill in the doctor's voice which showed that he was himself deeply moved by that which he told us.
Holmes leaned forward in his excitement and his eyes had the hard, dry glitter which shot from them when he was keenly interested.
The marks were some twenty yards from the body and no one gave them a thought. I don't suppose I should have done so had I not known this legend.
There are two lines of old yew hedge, twelve feet high and impenetrable. The walk in the centre is about eight feet across.
So that to reach the yew alley one either has to come down it from the house or else to enter it by the moor-gate?
Now, tell me, Dr. Mortimer-and this is important-the marks which you saw were on the path and not on the grass?
"If I had only been there!" he cried. "It is evidently a case of extraordinary interest, and one which presented immense opportunities to the scientific expert.
That gravel page upon which I might have read so much has been long ere this smudged by the rain and defaced by the clogs of curious peasants.
Oh, Dr. Mortimer, Dr. Mortimer, to think that you should not have called me in! You have indeed much to answer for.
I could not call you in, Mr. Holmes, without disclosing these facts to the world, and I have already given my reasons for not wishing to do so.
Since the tragedy, Mr. Holmes, there have come to my ears several incidents which are hard to reconcile with the settled order of Nature.
I assure you that there is a reign of terror in the district, and that it is a hardy man who will cross the moor at night.
I see that you have quite gone over to the supernaturalists. But now, Dr. Mortimer, tell me this. If you hold these views, why have you come to consult me at all?
You tell me in the same breath that it is useless to investigate Sir Charles's death, and that you desire me to do it.
"By advising me as to what I should do with Sir Henry Baskerville, who arrives at Waterloo Station"-Dr. Mortimer looked at his watch-"in exactly one hour and a quarter."
Yes. On the death of Sir Charles we inquired for this young gentleman and found that he had been farming in Canada.
From the accounts which have reached us he is an excellent fellow in every way. I speak now not as a medical man but as a trustee and executor of Sir Charles's will.
None. The only other kinsman whom we have been able to trace was Rodger Baskerville, the youngest of three brothers of whom poor Sir Charles was the elder.
The second brother, who died young, is the father of this lad Henry. The third, Rodger, was the black sheep of the family.
He came of the old masterful Baskerville strain and was the very image, they tell me, of the family picture of old Hugo.
He made England too hot to hold him, fled to Central America, and died there in 1876 of yellow fever.
Henry is the last of the Baskervilles. In one hour and five minutes I meet him at Waterloo Station. I have had a wire that he arrived at Southampton this morning.
It seems natural, does it not? And yet, consider that every Baskerville who goes there meets with an evil fate.
I feel sure that if Sir Charles could have spoken with me before his death he would have warned me against bringing this, the last of the old race, and the heir to great wealth, to that deadly place.
And yet it cannot be denied that the prosperity of the whole poor, bleak countryside depends upon his presence.
All the good work which has been done by Sir Charles will crash to the ground if there is no tenant of the Hall.
I fear lest I should be swayed too much by my own obvious interest in the matter, and that is why I bring the case before you and ask for your advice.
"Put into plain words, the matter is this," said he. "In your opinion there is a diabolical agency which makes Dartmoor an unsafe abode for a Baskerville-that is your opinion?"
Exactly. But surely, if your supernatural theory be correct, it could work the young man evil in London as easily as in Devonshire.
You put the matter more flippantly, Mr. Holmes, than you would probably do if you were brought into personal contact with these things.
Your advice, then, as I understand it, is that the young man will be as safe in Devonshire as in London.
I recommend, sir, that you take a cab, call off your spaniel who is scratching at my front door, and proceed to Waterloo to meet Sir Henry Baskerville.
Twenty-four hours. At ten o'clock tomorrow, Dr. Mortimer, I will be much obliged to you if you will call upon me here, and it will be of help to me in my plans for the future if you will bring Sir Henry Baskerville with you.
"I will do so, Mr. Holmes." He scribbled the appointment on his shirt-cuff and hurried off in his strange, peering, absent-minded fashion.
Only one more question, Dr. Mortimer. You say that before Sir Charles Baskerville's death several people saw this apparition upon the moor?
Holmes returned to his seat with that quiet look of inward satisfaction which meant that he had a congenial task before him.
No, my dear fellow, it is at the hour of action that I turn to you for aid. But this is splendid, really unique from some points of view.
When you pass Bradley's, would you ask him to send up a pound of the strongest shag tobacco? Thank you.
It would be as well if you could make it convenient not to return before evening. Then I should be very glad to compare impressions as to this most interesting problem which has been submitted to us this morning.
I therefore spent the day at my club and did not return to Baker Street until evening. It was nearly nine o'clock when I found myself in the sitting-room once more.
My first impression as I opened the door was that a fire had broken out, for the room was so filled with smoke that the light of the lamp upon the table was blurred by it.
As I entered, however, my fears were set at rest, for it was the acrid fumes of strong coarse tobacco which took me by the throat and set me coughing.
Through the haze I had a vague vision of Holmes in his dressing-gown coiled up in an armchair with his black clay pipe between his lips.
He laughed at my bewildered expression. "There is a delightful freshness about you, Watson, which makes it a pleasure to exercise any small powers which I possess at your expense.
A gentleman goes forth on a showery and miry day. He returns immaculate in the evening with the gloss still on his hat and his boots.
He has been a fixture therefore all day. He is not a man with intimate friends. Where, then, could he have been?
The world is full of obvious things which nobody by any chance ever observes. Where do you think that I have been?
Exactly. My body has remained in this armchair and has, I regret to observe, consumed in my absence two large pots of coffee and an incredible amount of tobacco.
After you left I sent down to Stamford's for the Ordnance map of this portion of the moor, and my spirit has hovered over it all day.
He unrolled one section and held it over his knee. "Here you have the particular district which concerns us.
Exactly. I fancy the yew alley, though not marked under that name, must stretch along this line, with the moor, as you perceive, upon the right of it.
This small clump of buildings here is the hamlet of Grimpen, where our friend Dr. Mortimer has his headquarters.
Within a radius of five miles there are, as you see, only a very few scattered dwellings. Here is Lafter Hall, which was mentioned in the narrative.
There is a house indicated here which may be the residence of the naturalist-Stapleton, if I remember right, was his name.
Here are two moorland farmhouses, High Tor and Foulmire. Then fourteen miles away the great convict prison of Princetown.
Between and around these scattered points extends the desolate, lifeless moor. This, then, is the stage upon which tragedy has been played, and upon which we may help to play it again.
The devil's agents may be of flesh and blood, may they not? There are two questions waiting for us at the outset.
The one is whether any crime has been committed at all; the second is, what is the crime and how was it committed?
Of course, if Dr. Mortimer's surmise should be correct, and we are dealing with forces outside the ordinary laws of Nature, there is an end of our investigation.
But we are bound to exhaust all other hypotheses before falling back upon this one. I think we'll shut that window again, if you don't mind.
It has certainly a character of its own. There are points of distinction about it. That change in the footprints, for example.
He only repeated what some fool had said at the inquest. Why should a man walk on tiptoe down the alley?
He was running, Watson-running desperately, running for his life, running until he burst his heart-and fell dead upon his face.
There lies our problem. There are indications that the man was crazed with fear before ever he began to run.
If the gipsy's evidence may be taken as true, he ran with cries for help in the direction where help was least likely to be.
Then, again, whom was he waiting for that night, and why was he waiting for him in the yew alley rather than in his own house?
The man was elderly and infirm. We can understand his taking an evening stroll, but the ground was damp and the night inclement.
Is it natural that he should stand for five or ten minutes, as Dr. Mortimer, with more practical sense than I should have given him credit for, deduced from the cigar ash?
I think it unlikely that he waited at the moor-gate every evening. On the contrary, the evidence is that he avoided the moor.
That night he waited there. It was the night before he made his departure for London. The thing takes shape, Watson.
It becomes coherent. Might I ask you to hand me my violin, and we will postpone all further thought upon this business until we have had the advantage of meeting Dr. Mortimer and Sir Henry Baskerville in the morning.
Our breakfast table was cleared early, and Holmes waited in his dressing-gown for the promised interview.
Our clients were punctual to their appointment, for the clock had just struck ten when Dr. Mortimer was shown up, followed by the young baronet.
The latter was a small, alert, dark-eyed man about thirty years of age, very sturdily built, with thick black eyebrows and a strong, pugnacious face.
He wore a ruddy-tinted tweed suit and had the weather-beaten appearance of one who has spent most of his time in the open air, and yet there was something in his steady eye and the quiet assurance of his bearing which indicated the gentleman.
"Why, yes," said he, "and the strange thing is, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, that if my friend here had not proposed coming round to you this morning I should have come on my own account.
I understand that you think out little puzzles, and I've had one this morning which wants more thinking out than I am able to give it.
Pray take a seat, Sir Henry. Do I understand you to say that you have yourself had some remarkable experience since you arrived in London?
Nothing of much importance, Mr. Holmes. Only a joke, as like as not. It was this letter, if you can call it a letter, which reached me this morning.
He laid an envelope upon the table, and we all bent over it. It was of common quality, greyish in colour.
The address, "Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel," was printed in rough characters; the post-mark "Charing Cross," and the date of posting the preceding evening.
"Who knew that you were going to the Northumberland Hotel?" asked Holmes, glancing keenly across at our visitor.
"Hum! Someone seems to be very deeply interested in your movements." Out of the envelope he took a half-sheet of foolscap paper folded into four.
This he opened and spread flat upon the table. Across the middle of it a single sentence had been formed by the expedient of pasting printed words upon it.
"Now," said Sir Henry Baskerville, "perhaps you will tell me, Mr. Holmes, what in thunder is the meaning of that, and who it is that takes so much interest in my affairs?"
What do you make of it, Dr. Mortimer? You must allow that there is nothing supernatural about this, at any rate?
No, sir, but it might very well come from someone who was convinced that the business is supernatural.
"What business?" asked Sir Henry sharply. "It seems to me that all you gentlemen know a great deal more than I do about my own affairs."
"You shall share our knowledge before you leave this room, Sir Henry. I promise you that," said Sherlock Holmes.
We will confine ourselves for the present with your permission to this very interesting document, which must have been put together and posted yesterday evening.
'You may be cajoled into imagining that your own special trade or your own industry will be encouraged by a protective tariff, but it stands to reason that such legislation must in the long run keep away wealth from the country, diminish the value of our imports, and lower the general conditions of life in this island.'
"What do you think of that, Watson?" cried Holmes in high glee, rubbing his hands together with satisfaction.
Dr. Mortimer looked at Holmes with an air of professional interest, and Sir Henry Baskerville turned a pair of puzzled dark eyes upon me.
"I don't know much about the tariff and things of that kind," said he, "but it seems to me we've got a bit off the trail so far as that note is concerned."
On the contrary, I think we are particularly hot upon the trail, Sir Henry. Watson here knows more about my methods than you do, but I fear that even he has not quite grasped the significance of this sentence.
And yet, my dear Watson, there is so very close a connection that the one is extracted out of the other.
If any possible doubt remained it is settled by the fact that 'keep away' and 'from the' are cut out in one piece.
"Really, Mr. Holmes, this exceeds anything which I could have imagined," said Dr. Mortimer, gazing at my friend in amazement.
Because that is my special hobby. The differences are obvious. The supra-orbital crest, the facial angle, the maxillary curve, the-
But a Times leader is entirely distinctive, and these words could have been taken from nothing else. As it was done yesterday the strong probability was that we should find the words in yesterday's issue.
"So far as I can follow you, then, Mr. Holmes," said Sir Henry Baskerville, "someone cut out this message with a scissors-"
"Nail-scissors," said Holmes. "You can see that it was a very short-bladed scissors, since the cutter had to take two snips over 'keep away.'"
That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message with a pair of short-bladed scissors, pasted it with paste-
Because he could not find it in print. The other words were all simple and might be found in any issue, but 'moor' would be less common.
There are one or two indications, and yet the utmost pains have been taken to remove all clues. The address, you observe is printed in rough characters.
Again, you will observe that the words are not gummed on in an accurate line, but that some are much higher than others.
'Life,' for example is quite out of its proper place. That may point to carelessness or it may point to agitation and hurry upon the part of the cutter.
On the whole I incline to the latter view, since the matter was evidently important, and it is unlikely that the composer of such a letter would be careless.
If he were in a hurry it opens up the interesting question why he should be in a hurry, since any letter posted up to early morning would reach Sir Henry before he would leave his hotel.
Now, you would call it a guess, no doubt, but I am almost certain that this address has been written in a hotel.
If you examine it carefully you will see that both the pen and the ink have given the writer trouble.
The pen has spluttered twice in a single word and has run dry three times in a short address, showing that there was very little ink in the bottle.
Now, a private pen or ink-bottle is seldom allowed to be in such a state, and the combination of the two must be quite rare.
He was carefully examining the foolscap, upon which the words were pasted, holding it only an inch or two from his eyes.
"Nothing," said he, throwing it down. "It is a blank half-sheet of paper, without even a water-mark upon it.
I think we have drawn as much as we can from this curious letter; and now, Sir Henry, has anything else of interest happened to you since you have been in London?
"I seem to have walked right into the thick of a dime novel," said our visitor. "Why in thunder should anyone follow or watch me?"
Sir Henry smiled. "I don't know much of British life yet, for I have spent nearly all my time in the States and in Canada.
"My dear sir," cried Dr. Mortimer, "it is only mislaid. You will find it when you return to the hotel.
"Exactly," said Holmes, "however foolish the incident may seem. You have lost one of your boots, you say?"
Well, mislaid it, anyhow. I put them both outside my door last night, and there was only one in the morning.
I could get no sense out of the chap who cleans them. The worst of it is that I only bought the pair last night in the Strand, and I have never had them on.
Then I understand that on your arrival in London yesterday you went out at once and bought a pair of boots?
Among other things I bought these brown boots-gave six dollars for them-and had one stolen before ever I had them on my feet.
"It seems a singularly useless thing to steal," said Sherlock Holmes. "I confess that I share Dr. Mortimer's belief that it will not be long before the missing boot is found."
"And, now, gentlemen," said the baronet with decision, "it seems to me that I have spoken quite enough about the little that I know.
"Your request is a very reasonable one," Holmes answered. "Dr. Mortimer, I think you could not do better than to tell your story as you told it to us."
Thus encouraged, our scientific friend drew his papers from his pocket and presented the whole case as he had done upon the morning before.
Sir Henry Baskerville listened with the deepest attention and with an occasional exclamation of surprise.
"Well, I seem to have come into an inheritance with a vengeance," said he when the long narrative was finished.
Of course, I've heard of the hound ever since I was in the nursery. It's the pet story of the family, though I never thought of taking it seriously before.
But as to my uncle's death-well, it all seems boiling up in my head, and I can't get it clear yet. You don't seem quite to have made up your mind whether it's a case for a policeman or a clergyman.
"It seems to show that someone knows more than we do about what goes on upon the moor," said Dr. Mortimer.
"And also," said Holmes, "that someone is not ill-disposed towards you, since they warn you of danger."
Well, of course, that is possible also. I am very much indebted to you, Dr. Mortimer, for introducing me to a problem which presents several interesting alternatives.
But the practical point which we now have to decide, Sir Henry, is whether it is or is not advisable for you to go to Baskerville Hall.
His dark brows knitted and his face flushed to a dusky red as he spoke. It was evident that the fiery temper of the Baskervilles was not extinct in this their last representative.
"Meanwhile," said he, "I have hardly had time to think over all that you have told me. It's a big thing for a man to have to understand and to decide at one sitting.
I should like to have a quiet hour by myself to make up my mind. Now, look here, Mr. Holmes, it's half-past eleven now and I am going back right away to my hotel.
Suppose you and your friend, Dr. Watson, come round and lunch with us at two. I'll be able to tell you more clearly then how this thing strikes me.
We heard the steps of our visitors descend the stair and the bang of the front door. In an instant Holmes had changed from the languid dreamer to the man of action.
"Your hat and boots, Watson, quick! Not a moment to lose!" He rushed into his room in his dressing-gown and was back again in a few seconds in a frock-coat.
We hurried together down the stairs and into the street. Dr. Mortimer and Baskerville were still visible about two hundred yards ahead of us in the direction of Oxford Street.
Not for the world, my dear Watson. I am perfectly satisfied with your company if you will tolerate mine.
He quickened his pace until we had decreased the distance which divided us by about half. Then, still keeping a hundred yards behind, we followed into Oxford Street and so down Regent Street.
Once our friends stopped and stared into a shop window, upon which Holmes did the same. An instant afterwards he gave a little cry of satisfaction, and, following the direction of his eager eyes, I saw that a hansom cab with a man inside which had halted on the other side of the street was now proceeding slowly onward again.
At that instant I was aware of a bushy black beard and a pair of piercing eyes turned upon us through the side window of the cab.
Instantly the trapdoor at the top flew up, something was screamed to the driver, and the cab flew madly off down Regent Street.
Holmes looked eagerly round for another, but no empty one was in sight. Then he dashed in wild pursuit amid the stream of the traffic, but the start was too great, and already the cab was out of sight.
"There now!" said Holmes bitterly as he emerged panting and white with vexation from the tide of vehicles.
Was ever such bad luck and such bad management, too? Watson, Watson, if you are an honest man you will record this also and set it against my successes!
Well, it was evident from what we have heard that Baskerville has been very closely shadowed by someone since he has been in town.
How else could it be known so quickly that it was the Northumberland Hotel which he had chosen? If they had followed him the first day I argued that they would follow him also the second.
You may have observed that I twice strolled over to the window while Dr. Mortimer was reading his legend.
I was looking out for loiterers in the street, but I saw none. We are dealing with a clever man, Watson.
This matter cuts very deep, and though I have not finally made up my mind whether it is a benevolent or a malevolent agency which is in touch with us, I am conscious always of power and design.
When our friends left I at once followed them in the hopes of marking down their invisible attendant.
So wily was he that he had not trusted himself upon foot, but he had availed himself of a cab so that he could loiter behind or dash past them and so escape their notice.
His method had the additional advantage that if they were to take a cab he was all ready to follow them.
My dear Watson, clumsy as I have been, you surely do not seriously imagine that I neglected to get the number?
When our unknown had followed Baskerville home we should have had the opportunity of playing his own game upon himself and seeing where he made for.
As it is, by an indiscreet eagerness, which was taken advantage of with extraordinary quickness and energy by our opponent, we have betrayed ourselves and lost our man.
We had been sauntering slowly down Regent Street during this conversation, and Dr. Mortimer, with his companion, had long vanished in front of us.
"There is no object in our following them," said Holmes. "The shadow has departed and will not return.
We must see what further cards we have in our hands and play them with decision. Could you swear to that man's face within the cab?
And so could I-from which I gather that in all probability it was a false one. A clever man upon so delicate an errand has no use for a beard save to conceal his features.
Ah, Wilson, I see you have not forgotten the little case in which I had the good fortune to help you?
My dear fellow, you exaggerate. I have some recollection, Wilson, that you had among your boys a lad named Cartwright, who showed some ability during the investigation.
A lad of fourteen, with a bright, keen face, had obeyed the summons of the manager. He stood now gazing with great reverence at the famous detective.
"Let me have the Hotel Directory," said Holmes. "Thank you! Now, Cartwright, there are the names of twenty-three hotels here, all in the immediate neighbourhood of Charing Cross.
You will begin in each case by giving the outside porter one shilling. Here are twenty-three shillings.
You will tell him that you want to see the waste-paper of yesterday. You will say that an important telegram has miscarried and that you are looking for it.
But what you are really looking for is the centre page of the Times with some holes cut in it with scissors.
In each case the outside porter will send for the hall porter, to whom also you will give a shilling.
Here are twenty-three shillings. You will then learn in possibly twenty cases out of the twenty-three that the waste of the day before has been burned or removed.
In the three other cases you will be shown a heap of paper and you will look for this page of the Times among it.
The odds are enormously against your finding it. There are ten shillings over in case of emergencies.
Let me have a report by wire at Baker Street before evening. And now, Watson, it only remains for us to find out by wire the identity of the cabman, No.
He would talk of nothing but art, of which he had the crudest ideas, from our leaving the gallery until we found ourselves at the Northumberland Hotel.
"Sir Henry Baskerville is upstairs expecting you," said the clerk. "He asked me to show you up at once when you came."
The book showed that two names had been added after that of Baskerville. One was Theophilus Johnson and family, of Newcastle; the other Mrs. Oldmore and maid, of High Lodge, Alton.
"Surely that must be the same Johnson whom I used to know," said Holmes to the porter. "A lawyer, is he not, grey-headed, and walks with a limp?"
Ah, that settles it. Mrs. Oldmore, too; I seem to remember the name. Excuse my curiosity, but often in calling upon one friend one finds another.
She is an invalid lady, sir. Her husband was once mayor of Gloucester. She always comes to us when she is in town.
"Thank you; I am afraid I cannot claim her acquaintance. We have established a most important fact by these questions, Watson," he continued in a low voice as we went upstairs together.
We know now that the people who are so interested in our friend have not settled down in his own hotel.
That means that while they are, as we have seen, very anxious to watch him, they are equally anxious that he should not see them.
As we came round the top of the stairs we had run up against Sir Henry Baskerville himself. His face was flushed with anger, and he held an old and dusty boot in one of his hands.
So furious was he that he was hardly articulate, and when he did speak it was in a much broader and more Western dialect than any which we had heard from him in the morning.
"Seems to me they are playing me for a sucker in this hotel," he cried. "They'll find they've started in to monkey with the wrong man unless they are careful.
By thunder, if that chap can't find my missing boot there will be trouble. I can take a joke with the best, Mr. Holmes, but they've got a bit over the mark this time.
That's just what I do mean to say. I only had three pairs in the world-the new brown, the old black, and the patent leathers, which I am wearing.
Last night they took one of my brown ones, and today they have sneaked one of the black. Well, have you got it?
Well, either that boot comes back before sundown or I'll see the manager and tell him that I go right straight out of this hotel.
Mind it is, for it's the last thing of mine that I'll lose in this den of thieves. Well, well, Mr. Holmes, you'll excuse my troubling you about such a trifle-
I just don't attempt to explain it. It seems the very maddest, queerest thing that ever happened to me.
But we hold several threads in our hands, and the odds are that one or other of them guides us to the truth.
We had a pleasant luncheon in which little was said of the business which had brought us together. It was in the private sitting-room to which we afterwards repaired that Holmes asked Baskerville what were his intentions.
If their intentions are evil they might do you a mischief, and we should be powerless to prevent it. You did not know, Dr. Mortimer, that you were followed this morning from my house?
That, unfortunately, is what I cannot tell you. Have you among your neighbours or acquaintances on Dartmoor any man with a black, full beard?
Give me a telegraph form. 'Is all ready for Sir Henry?' That will do. Address to Mr. Barrymore, Baskerville Hall.
What is the nearest telegraph-office? Grimpen. Very good, we will send a second wire to the postmaster, Grimpen: 'Telegram to Mr. Barrymore to be delivered into his own hand.
If absent, please return wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel.' That should let us know before evening whether Barrymore is at his post in Devonshire or not.
He is the son of the old caretaker, who is dead. They have looked after the Hall for four generations now.
"At the same time," said Baskerville, "it's clear enough that so long as there are none of the family at the Hall these people have a mighty fine home and nothing to do."
"I hope," said Dr. Mortimer, "that you do not look with suspicious eyes upon everyone who received a legacy from Sir Charles, for I also had a thousand pounds left to me."
There were many insignificant sums to individuals, and a large number of public charities. The residue all went to Sir Henry.
Holmes raised his eyebrows in surprise. "I had no idea that so gigantic a sum was involved," said he.
Sir Charles had the reputation of being rich, but we did not know how very rich he was until we came to examine his securities.
Dear me! It is a stake for which a man might well play a desperate game. And one more question, Dr. Mortimer.
Supposing that anything happened to our young friend here-you will forgive the unpleasant hypothesis!-who would inherit the estate?
Since Rodger Baskerville, Sir Charles's younger brother died unmarried, the estate would descend to the Desmonds, who are distant cousins.
Yes; he once came down to visit Sir Charles. He is a man of venerable appearance and of saintly life.
He would be the heir to the estate because that is entailed. He would also be the heir to the money unless it were willed otherwise by the present owner, who can, of course, do what he likes with it.
No, Mr. Holmes, I have not. I've had no time, for it was only yesterday that I learned how matters stood.
But in any case I feel that the money should go with the title and estate. That was my poor uncle's idea.
How is the owner going to restore the glories of the Baskervilles if he has not money enough to keep up the property?
Quite so. Well, Sir Henry, I am of one mind with you as to the advisability of your going down to Devonshire without delay.
But Dr. Mortimer has his practice to attend to, and his house is miles away from yours. With all the goodwill in the world he may be unable to help you.
At the present instant one of the most revered names in England is being besmirched by a blackmailer, and only I can stop a disastrous scandal.
The proposition took me completely by surprise, but before I had time to answer, Baskerville seized me by the hand and wrung it heartily.
"Well, now, that is real kind of you, Dr. Watson," said he. "You see how it is with me, and you know just as much about the matter as I do.
The promise of adventure had always a fascination for me, and I was complimented by the words of Holmes and by the eagerness with which the baronet hailed me as a companion.
"And you will report very carefully to me," said Holmes. "When a crisis comes, as it will do, I will direct how you shall act.
Then on Saturday, unless you hear to the contrary, we shall meet at the ten-thirty train from Paddington.
We had risen to depart when Baskerville gave a cry of triumph, and diving into one of the corners of the room he drew a brown boot from under a cabinet.
"But it is a very singular thing," Dr. Mortimer remarked. "I searched this room carefully before lunch."
The German was sent for but professed to know nothing of the matter, nor could any inquiry clear it up.
Another item had been added to that constant and apparently purposeless series of small mysteries which had succeeded each other so rapidly.
Visited twenty-three hotels as directed, but sorry to report unable to trace cut sheet of _Times_. CARTWRIGHT.
There go two of my threads, Watson. There is nothing more stimulating than a case where everything goes against you.
Exactly. I have wired to get his name and address from the Official Registry. I should not be surprised if this were an answer to my question.
The ring at the bell proved to be something even more satisfactory than an answer, however, for the door opened and a rough-looking fellow entered who was evidently the man himself.
"I got a message from the head office that a gent at this address had been inquiring for No. 2704," said he.
I've driven my cab this seven years and never a word of complaint. I came here straight from the Yard to ask you to your face what you had against me.
"I have nothing in the world against you, my good man," said Holmes. "On the contrary, I have half a sovereign for you if you will give me a clear answer to my questions."
"Well, I've had a good day and no mistake," said the cabman with a grin. "What was it you wanted to ask, sir?"
Now, Clayton, tell me all about the fare who came and watched this house at ten o'clock this morning and afterwards followed the two gentlemen down Regent Street.
The man looked surprised and a little embarrassed. "Why, there's no good my telling you things, for you seem to know as much as I do already," said he.
The truth is that the gentleman told me that he was a detective and that I was to say nothing about him to anyone.
My good fellow; this is a very serious business, and you may find yourself in a pretty bad position if you try to hide anything from me.
Holmes cast a swift glance of triumph at me. "Oh, he mentioned his name, did he? That was imprudent. What was the name that he mentioned?"
Never have I seen my friend more completely taken aback than by the cabman's reply. For an instant he sat in silent amazement.
"A touch, Watson-an undeniable touch!" said he. "I feel a foil as quick and supple as my own. He got home upon me very prettily that time.
He hailed me at half-past nine in Trafalgar Square. He said that he was a detective, and he offered me two guineas if I would do exactly what he wanted all day and ask no questions.
I was glad enough to agree. First we drove down to the Northumberland Hotel and waited there until two gentlemen came out and took a cab from the rank.
Well, I couldn't be sure of that, but I dare say my fare knew all about it. We pulled up halfway down the street and waited an hour and a half.
Until we got three-quarters down Regent Street. Then my gentleman threw up the trap, and he cried that I should drive right away to Waterloo Station as hard as I could go.
I whipped up the mare and we were there under the ten minutes. Then he paid up his two guineas, like a good one, and away he went into the station.
Only just as he was leaving he turned round and he said: 'It might interest you to know that you have been driving Mr. Sherlock Holmes.'
He was dressed like a toff, and he had a black beard, cut square at the end, and a pale face. I don't know as I could say more than that.
Well, then, here is your half-sovereign. There's another one waiting for you if you can bring any more information.
John Clayton departed chuckling, and Holmes turned to me with a shrug of his shoulders and a rueful smile.
I tell you, Watson, this time we have got a foeman who is worthy of our steel. I've been checkmated in London.
About sending you. It's an ugly business, Watson, an ugly dangerous business, and the more I see of it the less I like it.
Yes, my dear fellow, you may laugh, but I give you my word that I shall be very glad to have you back safe and sound in Baker Street once more.
Sir Henry Baskerville and Dr. Mortimer were ready upon the appointed day, and we started as arranged for Devonshire.
Mr. Sherlock Holmes drove with me to the station and gave me his last parting injunctions and advice.
"I will not bias your mind by suggesting theories or suspicions, Watson," said he; "I wish you simply to report facts in the fullest possible manner to me, and you can leave me to do the theorizing."
I really think that we may eliminate him entirely from our calculations. There remain the people who will actually surround Sir Henry Baskerville upon the moor.
By no means. You could not make a greater mistake. If they are innocent it would be a cruel injustice, and if they are guilty we should be giving up all chance of bringing it home to them.
No, no, we will preserve them upon our list of suspects. Then there is a groom at the Hall, if I remember right.
There are two moorland farmers. There is our friend Dr. Mortimer, whom I believe to be entirely honest, and there is his wife, of whom we know nothing.
There is this naturalist, Stapleton, and there is his sister, who is said to be a young lady of attractions.
There is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who is also an unknown factor, and there are one or two other neighbours.
"No, we have no news of any kind," said Dr. Mortimer in answer to my friend's questions. "I can swear to one thing, and that is that we have not been shadowed during the last two days.
Except yesterday afternoon. I usually give up one day to pure amusement when I come to town, so I spent it at the Museum of the College of Surgeons.
"It was imprudent, all the same," said Holmes, shaking his head and looking very grave. "I beg, Sir Henry, that you will not go about alone.
"Indeed. That is very interesting. Well, good-bye," he added as the train began to glide down the platform.
Bear in mind, Sir Henry, one of the phrases in that queer old legend which Dr. Mortimer has read to us, and avoid the moor in those hours of darkness when the powers of evil are exalted.
I looked back at the platform when we had left it far behind and saw the tall, austere figure of Holmes standing motionless and gazing after us.
The journey was a swift and pleasant one, and I spent it in making the more intimate acquaintance of my two companions and in playing with Dr. Mortimer's spaniel.
Young Baskerville stared eagerly out of the window and cried aloud with delight as he recognized the familiar features of the Devon scenery.
"I've been over a good part of the world since I left it, Dr. Watson," said he; "but I have never seen a place to compare with it."
Poor Sir Charles's head was of a very rare type, half Gaelic, half Ivernian in its characteristics. But you were very young when you last saw Baskerville Hall, were you not?
I was a boy in my teens at the time of my father's death and had never seen the Hall, for he lived in a little cottage on the South Coast.
Thence I went straight to a friend in America. I tell you it is all as new to me as it is to Dr. Watson, and I'm as keen as possible to see the moor.
"Are you? Then your wish is easily granted, for there is your first sight of the moor," said Dr. Mortimer, pointing out of the carriage window.
There were pride, valour, and strength in his thick brows, his sensitive nostrils, and his large hazel eyes.
If on that forbidding moor a difficult and dangerous quest should lie before us, this was at least a comrade for whom one might venture to take a risk with the certainty that he would bravely share it.
The train pulled up at a small wayside station and we all descended. Outside, beyond the low, white fence, a wagonette with a pair of cobs was waiting.
Our coming was evidently a great event, for station-master and porters clustered round us to carry out our luggage.
The coachman, a hard-faced, gnarled little fellow, saluted Sir Henry Baskerville, and in a few minutes we were flying swiftly down the broad, white road.
Rolling pasture lands curved upward on either side of us, and old gabled houses peeped out from amid the thick green foliage, but behind the peaceful and sunlit countryside there rose ever, dark against the evening sky, the long, gloomy curve of the moor, broken by the jagged and sinister hills.
The wagonette swung round into a side road, and we curved upward through deep lanes worn by centuries of wheels, high banks on either side, heavy with dripping moss and fleshy hart's-tongue ferns.
Both road and stream wound up through a valley dense with scrub oak and fir. At every turn Baskerville gave an exclamation of delight, looking eagerly about him and asking countless questions.
To his eyes all seemed beautiful, but to me a tinge of melancholy lay upon the countryside, which bore so clearly the mark of the waning year.
Yellow leaves carpeted the lanes and fluttered down upon us as we passed. The rattle of our wheels died away as we drove through drifts of rotting vegetation-sad gifts, as it seemed to me, for Nature to throw before the carriage of the returning heir of the Baskervilles.
Yes, sir, but the chance of five pounds is but a poor thing compared to the chance of having your throat cut.
The commutation of his death sentence had been due to some doubts as to his complete sanity, so atrocious was his conduct.
Our wagonette had topped a rise and in front of us rose the huge expanse of the moor, mottled with gnarled and craggy cairns and tors.
It needed but this to complete the grim suggestiveness of the barren waste, the chilling wind, and the darkling sky.
The road in front of us grew bleaker and wilder over huge russet and olive slopes, sprinkled with giant boulders.
Now and then we passed a moorland cottage, walled and roofed with stone, with no creeper to break its harsh outline.
Suddenly we looked down into a cuplike depression, patched with stunted oaks and firs which had been twisted and bent by the fury of years of storm.
The lodge was a ruin of black granite and bared ribs of rafters, but facing it was a new building, half constructed, the first fruit of Sir Charles's South African gold.
Through the gateway we passed into the avenue, where the wheels were again hushed amid the leaves, and the old trees shot their branches in a sombre tunnel over our heads.
Baskerville shuddered as he looked up the long, dark drive to where the house glimmered like a ghost at the farther end.
"It's no wonder my uncle felt as if trouble were coming on him in such a place as this," said he. "It's enough to scare any man.
I'll have a row of electric lamps up here inside of six months, and you won't know it again, with a thousand candle-power Swan and Edison right here in front of the hall door.
The avenue opened into a broad expanse of turf, and the house lay before us. In the fading light I could see that the centre was a heavy block of building from which a porch projected.
The whole front was draped in ivy, with a patch clipped bare here and there where a window or a coat of arms broke through the dark veil.
From this central block rose the twin towers, ancient, crenelated, and pierced with many loopholes. To right and left of the turrets were more modern wings of black granite.
A dull light shone through heavy mullioned windows, and from the high chimneys which rose from the steep, high-angled roof there sprang a single black column of smoke.
A tall man had stepped from the shadow of the porch to open the door of the wagonette. The figure of a woman was silhouetted against the yellow light of the hall.
No, I must go. I shall probably find some work awaiting me. I would stay to show you over the house, but Barrymore will be a better guide than I. Good-bye, and never hesitate night or day to send for me if I can be of service.
The wheels died away down the drive while Sir Henry and I turned into the hall, and the door clanged heavily behind us.
It was a fine apartment in which we found ourselves, large, lofty, and heavily raftered with huge baulks of age-blackened oak.
In the great old-fashioned fireplace behind the high iron dogs a log-fire crackled and snapped. Sir Henry and I held out our hands to it, for we were numb from our long drive.
Then we gazed round us at the high, thin window of old stained glass, the oak panelling, the stags' heads, the coats of arms upon the walls, all dim and sombre in the subdued light of the central lamp.
"It's just as I imagined it," said Sir Henry. "Is it not the very picture of an old family home? To think that this should be the same hall in which for five hundred years my people have lived.
I saw his dark face lit up with a boyish enthusiasm as he gazed about him. The light beat upon him where he stood, but long shadows trailed down the walls and hung like a black canopy above him.
Barrymore had returned from taking our luggage to our rooms. He stood in front of us now with the subdued manner of a well-trained servant.
He was a remarkable-looking man, tall, handsome, with a square black beard and pale, distinguished features.
In a very few minutes, sir. You will find hot water in your rooms. My wife and I will be happy, Sir Henry, to stay with you until you have made your fresh arrangements, but you will understand that under the new conditions this house will require a considerable staff.
I only meant, sir, that Sir Charles led a very retired life, and we were able to look after his wants.
But your family have been with us for several generations, have they not? I should be sorry to begin my life here by breaking an old family connection.
I feel that also, sir, and so does my wife. But to tell the truth, sir, we were both very much attached to Sir Charles, and his death gave us a shock and made these surroundings very painful to us.
I have no doubt, sir, that we shall succeed in establishing ourselves in some business. Sir Charles's generosity has given us the means to do so.
My own was in the same wing as Baskerville's and almost next door to it. These rooms appeared to be much more modern than the central part of the house, and the bright paper and numerous candles did something to remove the sombre impression which our arrival had left upon my mind.
At one end a minstrel's gallery overlooked it. Black beams shot across above our heads, with a smoke-darkened ceiling beyond them.
A dim line of ancestors, in every variety of dress, from the Elizabethan knight to the buck of the Regency, stared down upon us and daunted us by their silent company.
We talked little, and I for one was glad when the meal was over and we were able to retire into the modern billiard-room and smoke a cigarette.
"My word, it isn't a very cheerful place," said Sir Henry. "I suppose one can tone down to it, but I feel a bit out of the picture at present.
I don't wonder that my uncle got a little jumpy if he lived all alone in such a house as this. However, if it suits you, we will retire early tonight, and perhaps things may seem more cheerful in the morning.
I drew aside my curtains before I went to bed and looked out from my window. It opened upon the grassy space which lay in front of the hall door.
Beyond, two copses of trees moaned and swung in a rising wind. A half moon broke through the rifts of racing clouds.
In its cold light I saw beyond the trees a broken fringe of rocks, and the long, low curve of the melancholy moor.
And yet it was not quite the last. I found myself weary and yet wakeful, tossing restlessly from side to side, seeking for the sleep which would not come.
Far away a chiming clock struck out the quarters of the hours, but otherwise a deathly silence lay upon the old house.
And then suddenly, in the very dead of the night, there came a sound to my ears, clear, resonant, and unmistakable.
It was the sob of a woman, the muffled, strangling gasp of one who is torn by an uncontrollable sorrow.
I sat up in bed and listened intently. The noise could not have been far away and was certainly in the house.
For half an hour I waited with every nerve on the alert, but there came no other sound save the chiming clock and the rustle of the ivy on the wall.
The fresh beauty of the following morning did something to efface from our minds the grim and grey impression which had been left upon both of us by our first experience of Baskerville Hall.
As Sir Henry and I sat at breakfast the sunlight flooded in through the high mullioned windows, throwing watery patches of colour from the coats of arms which covered them.
The dark panelling glowed like bronze in the golden rays, and it was hard to realise that this was indeed the chamber which had struck such a gloom into our souls upon the evening before.
"I guess it is ourselves and not the house that we have to blame!" said the baronet. "We were tired with our journey and chilled by our drive, so we took a grey view of the place.
"And yet it was not entirely a question of imagination," I answered. "Did you, for example, happen to hear someone, a woman I think, sobbing in the night?"
That is curious, for I did when I was half asleep fancy that I heard something of the sort. I waited quite a time, but there was no more of it, so I concluded that it was all a dream.
"We must ask about this right away." He rang the bell and asked Barrymore whether he could account for our experience.
It seemed to me that the pallid features of the butler turned a shade paler still as he listened to his master's question.
"There are only two women in the house, Sir Henry," he answered. "One is the scullery-maid, who sleeps in the other wing.
And yet he lied as he said it, for it chanced that after breakfast I met Mrs. Barrymore in the long corridor with the sun full upon her face.
She was a large, impassive, heavy-featured woman with a stern set expression of mouth. But her telltale eyes were red and glanced at me from between swollen lids.
It was she, then, who wept in the night, and if she did so her husband must know it. Yet he had taken the obvious risk of discovery in declaring that it was not so.
Why had he done this? And why did she weep so bitterly? Already round this pale-faced, handsome, black-bearded man there was gathering an atmosphere of mystery and of gloom.
It was he who had been the first to discover the body of Sir Charles, and we had only his word for all the circumstances which led up to the old man's death.
Was it possible that it was Barrymore, after all, whom we had seen in the cab in Regent Street? The beard might well have been the same.
The cabman had described a somewhat shorter man, but such an impression might easily have been erroneous.
How could I settle the point forever? Obviously the first thing to do was to see the Grimpen postmaster and find whether the test telegram had really been placed in Barrymore's own hands.
Sir Henry had numerous papers to examine after breakfast, so that the time was propitious for my excursion.
Well, he was up in the loft at the time, so that I could not put it into his own hands, but I gave it into Mrs. Barrymore's hands, and she promised to deliver it at once.
"Well, surely his own wife ought to know where he is," said the postmaster testily. "Didn't he get the telegram?
It seemed hopeless to pursue the inquiry any farther, but it was clear that in spite of Holmes's ruse we had no proof that Barrymore had not been in London all the time.
Suppose that it were so-suppose that the same man had been the last who had seen Sir Charles alive, and the first to dog the new heir when he returned to England.
What then? Was he the agent of others or had he some sinister design of his own? What interest could he have in persecuting the Baskerville family?
I thought of the strange warning clipped out of the leading article of the _Times_. Was that his work or was it possibly the doing of someone who was bent upon counteracting his schemes?
The only conceivable motive was that which had been suggested by Sir Henry, that if the family could be scared away a comfortable and permanent home would be secured for the Barrymores.
But surely such an explanation as that would be quite inadequate to account for the deep and subtle scheming which seemed to be weaving an invisible net round the young baronet.
Holmes himself had said that no more complex case had come to him in all the long series of his sensational investigations.
I prayed, as I walked back along the grey, lonely road, that my friend might soon be freed from his preoccupations and able to come down to take this heavy burden of responsibility from my shoulders.
Suddenly my thoughts were interrupted by the sound of running feet behind me and by a voice which called me by name.
A tin box for botanical specimens hung over his shoulder and he carried a green butterfly-net in one of his hands.
"You will, I am sure, excuse my presumption, Dr. Watson," said he as he came panting up to where I stood.
Here on the moor we are homely folk and do not wait for formal introductions. You may possibly have heard my name from our mutual friend, Mortimer.
"Your net and box would have told me as much," said I, "for I knew that Mr. Stapleton was a naturalist.
I have been calling on Mortimer, and he pointed you out to me from the window of his surgery as you passed.
As our road lay the same way I thought that I would overtake you and introduce myself. I trust that Sir Henry is none the worse for his journey?
We were all rather afraid that after the sad death of Sir Charles the new baronet might refuse to live here.
It is asking much of a wealthy man to come down and bury himself in a place of this kind, but I need not tell you that it means a very great deal to the countryside.
It is extraordinary how credulous the peasants are about here! Any number of them are ready to swear that they have seen such a creature upon the moor.
He spoke with a smile, but I seemed to read in his eyes that he took the matter more seriously. "The story took a great hold upon the imagination of Sir Charles, and I have no doubt that it led to his tragic end."
His nerves were so worked up that the appearance of any dog might have had a fatal effect upon his diseased heart.
I fancy that he really did see something of the kind upon that last night in the yew alley. I feared that some disaster might occur, for I was very fond of the old man, and I knew that his heart was weak.
The words took away my breath for an instant but a glance at the placid face and steadfast eyes of my companion showed that no surprise was intended.
"It is useless for us to pretend that we do not know you, Dr. Watson," said he. "The records of your detective have reached us here, and you could not celebrate him without being known yourself.
When Mortimer told me your name he could not deny your identity. If you are here, then it follows that Mr. Sherlock Holmes is interesting himself in the matter, and I am naturally curious to know what view he may take.
If I had any indication of the nature of your suspicions or how you propose to investigate the case, I might perhaps even now give you some aid or advice.
I assure you that I am simply here upon a visit to my friend, Sir Henry, and that I need no help of any kind.
"Excellent!" said Stapleton. "You are perfectly right to be wary and discreet. I am justly reproved for what I feel was an unjustifiable intrusion, and I promise you that I will not mention the matter again."
We had come to a point where a narrow grassy path struck off from the road and wound away across the moor.
A steep, boulder-sprinkled hill lay upon the right which had in bygone days been cut into a granite quarry.
The face which was turned towards us formed a dark cliff, with ferns and brambles growing in its niches.
"A moderate walk along this moor-path brings us to Merripit House," said he. "Perhaps you will spare an hour that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to my sister."
My first thought was that I should be by Sir Henry's side. But then I remembered the pile of papers and bills with which his study table was littered.
It was certain that I could not help with those. And Holmes had expressly said that I should study the neighbours upon the moor.
"It is a wonderful place, the moor," said he, looking round over the undulating downs, long green rollers, with crests of jagged granite foaming up into fantastic surges.
You never tire of the moor. You cannot think the wonderful secrets which it contains. It is so vast, and so barren, and so mysterious.
I have only been here two years. The residents would call me a newcomer. We came shortly after Sir Charles settled.
But my tastes led me to explore every part of the country round, and I should think that there are few men who know it better than I do.
Very hard. You see, for example, this great plain to the north here with the queer hills breaking out of it.
You would naturally think so and the thought has cost several their lives before now. You notice those bright green spots scattered thickly over it?
Stapleton laughed. "That is the great Grimpen Mire," said he. "A false step yonder means death to man or beast.
Only yesterday I saw one of the moor ponies wander into it. He never came out. I saw his head for quite a long time craning out of the bog-hole, but it sucked him down at last.
Even in dry seasons it is a danger to cross it, but after these autumn rains it is an awful place. And yet I can find my way to the very heart of it and return alive.
Something brown was rolling and tossing among the green sedges. Then a long, agonised, writhing neck shot upward and a dreadful cry echoed over the moor.
Well, you see the hills beyond? They are really islands cut off on all sides by the impassable mire, which has crawled round them in the course of years.
He looked at me with a surprised face. "For God's sake put such an idea out of your mind," said he. "Your blood would be upon my head.
I assure you that there would not be the least chance of your coming back alive. It is only by remembering certain complex landmarks that I am able to do it.
A long, low moan, indescribably sad, swept over the moor. It filled the whole air, and yet it was impossible to say whence it came.
From a dull murmur it swelled into a deep roar, and then sank back into a melancholy, throbbing murmur once again.
The peasants say it is the Hound of the Baskervilles calling for its prey. I've heard it once or twice before, but never quite so loud.
I looked round, with a chill of fear in my heart, at the huge swelling plain, mottled with the green patches of rushes.
Nothing stirred over the vast expanse save a pair of ravens, which croaked loudly from a tor behind us.
"You are an educated man. You don't believe such nonsense as that?" said I. "What do you think is the cause of so strange a sound?"
It's a very rare bird-practically extinct-in England now, but all things are possible upon the moor. Yes, I should not be surprised to learn that what we have heard is the cry of the last of the bitterns.
Yes, it's rather an uncanny place altogether. Look at the hillside yonder. What do you make of those?
He grazed his cattle on these slopes, and he learned to dig for tin when the bronze sword began to supersede the stone axe.
Look at the great trench in the opposite hill. That is his mark. Yes, you will find some very singular points about the moor, Dr. Watson.
A small fly or moth had fluttered across our path, and in an instant Stapleton was rushing with extraordinary energy and speed in pursuit of it.
To my dismay the creature flew straight for the great mire, and my acquaintance never paused for an instant, bounding from tuft to tuft behind it, his green net waving in the air.
She had come from the direction in which the plume of smoke indicated the position of Merripit House, but the dip of the moor had hid her until she was quite close.
She had a proud, finely cut face, so regular that it might have seemed impassive were it not for the sensitive mouth and the beautiful dark, eager eyes.
With her perfect figure and elegant dress she was, indeed, a strange apparition upon a lonely moorland path.
Her eyes were on her brother as I turned, and then she quickened her pace towards me. I had raised my hat and was about to make some explanatory remark when her own words turned all my thoughts into a new channel.
I could only stare at her in stupid surprise. Her eyes blazed at me, and she tapped the ground impatiently with her foot.
"I cannot explain." She spoke in a low, eager voice, with a curious lisp in her utterance. "But for God's sake do what I ask you.
"Man, man!" she cried. "Can you not tell when a warning is for your own good? Go back to London! Start tonight!
Get away from this place at all costs! Hush, my brother is coming! Not a word of what I have said. Would you mind getting that orchid for me among the mare's-tails yonder?
We are very rich in orchids on the moor, though, of course, you are rather late to see the beauties of the place.
"Halloa, Beryl!" said he, and it seemed to me that the tone of his greeting was not altogether a cordial one.
Yes, I was chasing a Cyclopides. He is very rare and seldom found in the late autumn. What a pity that I should have missed him!
A flush of vexation passed over her expressive face. "We have been talking at cross purposes," said she.
"I talked as if Dr. Watson were a resident instead of being merely a visitor," said she. "It cannot much matter to him whether it is early or late for the orchids.
A short walk brought us to it, a bleak moorland house, once the farm of some grazier in the old prosperous days, but now put into repair and turned into a modern dwelling.
An orchard surrounded it, but the trees, as is usual upon the moor, were stunted and nipped, and the effect of the whole place was mean and melancholy.
We were admitted by a strange, wizened, rusty-coated old manservant, who seemed in keeping with the house.
Inside, however, there were large rooms furnished with an elegance in which I seemed to recognize the taste of the lady.
As I looked from their windows at the interminable granite-flecked moor rolling unbroken to the farthest horizon I could not but marvel at what could have brought this highly educated man and this beautiful woman to live in such a place.
"Queer spot to choose, is it not?" said he as if in answer to my thought. "And yet we manage to make ourselves fairly happy, do we not, Beryl?"
However, the fates were against us. A serious epidemic broke out in the school and three of the boys died.
All this, Dr. Watson, has been brought upon your head by your expression as you surveyed the moor out of our window.
It certainly did cross my mind that it might be a little dull-less for you, perhaps, than for your sister.
We have books, we have our studies, and we have interesting neighbours. Dr. Mortimer is a most learned man in his own line.
Poor Sir Charles was also an admirable companion. We knew him well and miss him more than I can tell.
Do you think that I should intrude if I were to call this afternoon and make the acquaintance of Sir Henry?
Then perhaps you would mention that I propose to do so. We may in our humble way do something to make things more easy for him until he becomes accustomed to his new surroundings.
Will you come upstairs, Dr. Watson, and inspect my collection of Lepidoptera? I think it is the most complete one in the south-west of England.
I resisted all pressure to stay for lunch, and I set off at once upon my return journey, taking the grass-grown path by which we had come.
"I have run all the way in order to cut you off, Dr. Watson," said she. "I had not even time to put on my hat.
I must not stop, or my brother may miss me. I wanted to say to you how sorry I am about the stupid mistake I made in thinking that you were Sir Henry.
"But I can't forget them, Miss Stapleton," said I. "I am Sir Henry's friend, and his welfare is a very close concern of mine.
A woman's whim, Dr. Watson. When you know me better you will understand that I cannot always give reasons for what I say or do.
Life has become like that great Grimpen Mire, with little green patches everywhere into which one may sink and with no guide to point the track.
An expression of irresolution passed for an instant over her face, but her eyes had hardened again when she answered me.
But I do. If you have any influence with Sir Henry, take him away from a place which has always been fatal to his family.
Because it is the place of danger. That is Sir Henry's nature. I fear that unless you can give me some more definite information than this it would be impossible to get him to move.
I would ask you one more question, Miss Stapleton. If you meant no more than this when you first spoke to me, why should you not wish your brother to overhear what you said?
My brother is very anxious to have the Hall inhabited, for he thinks it is for the good of the poor folk upon the moor.
He would be very angry if he knew that I have said anything which might induce Sir Henry to go away. But I have done my duty now and I will say no more.
I must go back, or he will miss me and suspect that I have seen you. Good-bye!" She turned and had disappeared in a few minutes among the scattered boulders, while I, with my soul full of vague fears, pursued my way to Baskerville Hall.
From this point onward I will follow the course of events by transcribing my own letters to Mr. Sherlock Holmes which lie before me on the table.
One page is missing, but otherwise they are exactly as written and show my feelings and suspicions of the moment more accurately than my memory, clear as it is upon these tragic events, can possibly do.
My previous letters and telegrams have kept you pretty well up to date as to all that has occurred in this most God-forsaken corner of the world.
The longer one stays here the more does the spirit of the moor sink into one's soul, its vastness, and also its grim charm.
When you are once out upon its bosom you have left all traces of modern England behind you, but, on the other hand, you are conscious everywhere of the homes and the work of the prehistoric people.
On all sides of you as you walk are the houses of these forgotten folk, with their graves and the huge monoliths which are supposed to have marked their temples.
The strange thing is that they should have lived so thickly on what must always have been most unfruitful soil.
I am no antiquarian, but I could imagine that they were some unwarlike and harried race who were forced to accept that which none other would occupy.
All this, however, is foreign to the mission on which you sent me and will probably be very uninteresting to your severely practical mind.
I can still remember your complete indifference as to whether the sun moved round the earth or the earth round the sun.
If you have not had any report within the last few days it is because up to today there was nothing of importance to relate.
Then a very surprising circumstance occurred, which I shall tell you in due course. But, first of all, I must keep you in touch with some of the other factors in the situation.
A fortnight has passed since his flight, during which he has not been seen and nothing has been heard of him.
It is surely inconceivable that he could have held out upon the moor during all that time. Of course, so far as his concealment goes there is no difficulty at all.
Any one of these stone huts would give him a hiding-place. But there is nothing to eat unless he were to catch and slaughter one of the moor sheep.
We are four able-bodied men in this household, so that we could take good care of ourselves, but I confess that I have had uneasy moments when I have thought of the Stapletons.
They live miles from any help. There are one maid, an old manservant, the sister, and the brother, the latter not a very strong man.
They would be helpless in the hands of a desperate fellow like this Notting Hill criminal if he could once effect an entrance.
Both Sir Henry and I were concerned at their situation, and it was suggested that Perkins the groom should go over to sleep there, but Stapleton would not hear of it.
The fact is that our friend, the baronet, begins to display a considerable interest in our fair neighbour.
It is not to be wondered at, for time hangs heavily in this lonely spot to an active man like him, and she is a very fascinating and beautiful woman.
There is something tropical and exotic about her which forms a singular contrast to her cool and unemotional brother.
Yet he also gives the idea of hidden fires. He has certainly a very marked influence over her, for I have seen her continually glance at him as she talked as if seeking approbation for what she said.
I trust that he is kind to her. There is a dry glitter in his eyes and a firm set of his thin lips, which goes with a positive and possibly a harsh nature.
He came over to call upon Baskerville on that first day, and the very next morning he took us both to show us the spot where the legend of the wicked Hugo is supposed to have had its origin.
It was an excursion of some miles across the moor to a place which is so dismal that it might have suggested the story.
We found a short valley between rugged tors which led to an open, grassy space flecked over with the white cotton grass.
In the middle of it rose two great stones, worn and sharpened at the upper end until they looked like the huge corroding fangs of some monstrous beast.
He told us of similar cases, where families had suffered from some evil influence, and he left us with the impression that he shared the popular view upon the matter.
On our way back we stayed for lunch at Merripit House, and it was there that Sir Henry made the acquaintance of Miss Stapleton.
From the first moment that he saw her he appeared to be strongly attracted by her, and I am much mistaken if the feeling was not mutual.
He referred to her again and again on our walk home, and since then hardly a day has passed that we have not seen something of the brother and sister.
He is much attached to her, no doubt, and would lead a lonely life without her, but it would seem the height of selfishness if he were to stand in the way of her making so brilliant a marriage.
By the way, your instructions to me never to allow Sir Henry to go out alone will become very much more onerous if a love affair were to be added to our other difficulties.
The other day-Thursday, to be more exact-Dr. Mortimer lunched with us. He has been excavating a barrow at Long Down and has got a prehistoric skull which fills him with great joy.
It is a long, dismal walk, the yew alley, between two high walls of clipped hedge, with a narrow band of grass upon either side.
At the far end is an old tumble-down summer-house. Halfway down is the moor-gate, where the old gentleman left his cigar-ash.
It is a white wooden gate with a latch. Beyond it lies the wide moor. I remembered your theory of the affair and tried to picture all that had occurred.
As the old man stood there he saw something coming across the moor, something which terrified him so that he lost his wits and ran and ran until he died of sheer horror and exhaustion.
There was the long, gloomy tunnel down which he fled. And from what? A sheep-dog of the moor? Or a spectral hound, black, silent, and monstrous?
Was there a human agency in the matter? Did the pale, watchful Barrymore know more than he cared to say?
One other neighbour I have met since I wrote last. This is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who lives some four miles to the south of us.
He is an elderly man, red-faced, white-haired, and choleric. His passion is for the British law, and he has spent a large fortune in litigation.
He fights for the mere pleasure of fighting and is equally ready to take up either side of a question, so that it is no wonder that he has found it a costly amusement.
He is said to have about seven lawsuits upon his hands at present, which will probably swallow up the remainder of his fortune and so draw his sting and leave him harmless for the future.
Apart from the law he seems a kindly, good-natured person, and I only mention him because you were particular that I should send some description of the people who surround us.
He helps to keep our lives from being monotonous and gives a little comic relief where it is badly needed.
And now, having brought you up to date in the escaped convict, the Stapletons, Dr. Mortimer, and Frankland, of Lafter Hall, let me end on that which is most important and tell you more about the Barrymores, and especially about the surprising development of last night.
First of all about the test telegram, which you sent from London in order to make sure that Barrymore was really here.
I have already explained that the testimony of the postmaster shows that the test was worthless and that we have no proof one way or the other.
I told Sir Henry how the matter stood, and he at once, in his downright fashion, had Barrymore up and asked him whether he had received the telegram himself.
"I could not quite understand the object of your questions this morning, Sir Henry," said he. "I trust that they do not mean that I have done anything to forfeit your confidence?"
Sir Henry had to assure him that it was not so and pacify him by giving him a considerable part of his old wardrobe, the London outfit having now all arrived.
Mrs. Barrymore is of interest to me. She is a heavy, solid person, very limited, intensely respectable, and inclined to be puritanical.
Some deep sorrow gnaws ever at her heart. Sometimes I wonder if she has a guilty memory which haunts her, and sometimes I suspect Barrymore of being a domestic tyrant.
I have always felt that there was something singular and questionable in this man's character, but the adventure of last night brings all my suspicions to a head.
And yet it may seem a small matter in itself. You are aware that I am not a very sound sleeper, and since I have been on guard in this house my slumbers have been lighter than ever.
Last night, about two in the morning, I was aroused by a stealthy step passing my room. I rose, opened my door, and peeped out.
A long black shadow was trailing down the corridor. It was thrown by a man who walked softly down the passage with a candle held in his hand.
He was in shirt and trousers, with no covering to his feet. I could merely see the outline, but his height told me that it was Barrymore.
He walked very slowly and circumspectly, and there was something indescribably guilty and furtive in his whole appearance.
I have told you that the corridor is broken by the balcony which runs round the hall, but that it is resumed upon the farther side.
Now, all these rooms are unfurnished and unoccupied so that his expedition became more mysterious than ever.
The light shone steadily as if he were standing motionless. I crept down the passage as noiselessly as I could and peeped round the corner of the door.
For some minutes he stood watching intently. Then he gave a deep groan and with an impatient gesture he put out the light.
Instantly I made my way back to my room, and very shortly came the stealthy steps passing once more upon their return journey.
Long afterwards when I had fallen into a light sleep I heard a key turn somewhere in a lock, but I could not tell whence the sound came.
What it all means I cannot guess, but there is some secret business going on in this house of gloom which sooner or later we shall get to the bottom of.
If I was compelled to leave you without much news during the early days of my mission you must acknowledge that I am making up for lost time, and that events are now crowding thick and fast upon us.
In my last report I ended upon my top note with Barrymore at the window, and now I have quite a budget already which will, unless I am much mistaken, considerably surprise you.
Things have taken a turn which I could not have anticipated. In some ways they have within the last forty-eight hours become much clearer and in some ways they have become more complicated.
Before breakfast on the morning following my adventure I went down the corridor and examined the room in which Barrymore had been on the night before.
The western window through which he had stared so intently has, I noticed, one peculiarity above all other windows in the house-it commands the nearest outlook on to the moor.
There is an opening between two trees which enables one from this point of view to look right down upon it, while from all the other windows it is only a distant glimpse which can be obtained.
It follows, therefore, that Barrymore, since only this window would serve the purpose, must have been looking out for something or somebody upon the moor.
The night was very dark, so that I can hardly imagine how he could have hoped to see anyone. It had struck me that it was possible that some love intrigue was on foot.
That opening of the door which I had heard after I had returned to my room might mean that he had gone out to keep some clandestine appointment.
So I reasoned with myself in the morning, and I tell you the direction of my suspicions, however much the result may have shown that they were unfounded.
But whatever the true explanation of Barrymore's movements might be, I felt that the responsibility of keeping them to myself until I could explain them was more than I could bear.
I had an interview with the baronet in his study after breakfast, and I told him all that I had seen.
"I knew that Barrymore walked about nights, and I had a mind to speak to him about it," said he. "Two or three times I have heard his steps in the passage, coming and going, just about the hour you name."
Perhaps he does. If so, we should be able to shadow him and see what it is that he is after. I wonder what your friend Holmes would do if he were here.
The man is rather deaf, and in any case we must take our chance of that. We'll sit up in my room tonight and wait until he passes.
Sir Henry rubbed his hands with pleasure, and it was evident that he hailed the adventure as a relief to his somewhat quiet life upon the moor.
The baronet has been in communication with the architect who prepared the plans for Sir Charles, and with a contractor from London, so that we may expect great changes to begin here soon.
There have been decorators and furnishers up from Plymouth, and it is evident that our friend has large ideas and means to spare no pains or expense to restore the grandeur of his family.
When the house is renovated and refurnished, all that he will need will be a wife to make it complete.
And yet the course of true love does not run quite as smoothly as one would under the circumstances expect.
Today, for example, its surface was broken by a very unexpected ripple, which has caused our friend considerable perplexity and annoyance.
After the conversation which I have quoted about Barrymore, Sir Henry put on his hat and prepared to go out.
Well, you know what my instructions are. I am sorry to intrude, but you heard how earnestly Holmes insisted that I should not leave you, and especially that you should not go alone upon the moor.
"My dear fellow," said he, "Holmes, with all his wisdom, did not foresee some things which have happened since I have been on the moor.
You understand me? I am sure that you are the last man in the world who would wish to be a spoil-sport.
It put me in a most awkward position. I was at a loss what to say or what to do, and before I had made up my mind he picked up his cane and was gone.
But when I came to think the matter over my conscience reproached me bitterly for having on any pretext allowed him to go out of my sight.
I imagined what my feelings would be if I had to return to you and to confess that some misfortune had occurred through my disregard for your instructions.
I assure you my cheeks flushed at the very thought. It might not even now be too late to overtake him, so I set off at once in the direction of Merripit House.
I hurried along the road at the top of my speed without seeing anything of Sir Henry, until I came to the point where the moor path branches off.
There, fearing that perhaps I had come in the wrong direction after all, I mounted a hill from which I could command a view-the same hill which is cut into the dark quarry.
Thence I saw him at once. He was on the moor path about a quarter of a mile off, and a lady was by his side who could only be Miss Stapleton.
It was clear that there was already an understanding between them and that they had met by appointment.
To act the spy upon a friend was a hateful task. Still, I could see no better course than to observe him from the hill, and to clear my conscience by confessing to him afterwards what I had done.
It is true that if any sudden danger had threatened him I was too far away to be of use, and yet I am sure that you will agree with me that the position was very difficult, and that there was nothing more which I could do.
Our friend, Sir Henry, and the lady had halted on the path and were standing deeply absorbed in their conversation, when I was suddenly aware that I was not the only witness of their interview.
A wisp of green floating in the air caught my eye, and another glance showed me that it was carried on a stick by a man who was moving among the broken ground.
It was Stapleton with his butterfly-net. He was very much closer to the pair than I was, and he appeared to be moving in their direction.
At this instant Sir Henry suddenly drew Miss Stapleton to his side. His arm was round her, but it seemed to me that she was straining away from him with her face averted.
He stooped his head to hers, and she raised one hand as if in protest. Next moment I saw them spring apart and turn hurriedly round.
Stapleton was the cause of the interruption. He was running wildly towards them, his absurd net dangling behind him.
The naturalist's angry gestures showed that the lady was included in his displeasure. The baronet stood for a minute looking after them, and then he walked slowly back the way that he had come, his head hanging, the very picture of dejection.
What all this meant I could not imagine, but I was deeply ashamed to have witnessed so intimate a scene without my friend's knowledge.
I ran down the hill therefore and met the baronet at the bottom. His face was flushed with anger and his brows were wrinkled, like one who is at his wit's ends what to do.
"Halloa, Watson! Where have you dropped from?" said he. "You don't mean to say that you came after me in spite of all?"
I explained everything to him: how I had found it impossible to remain behind, how I had followed him, and how I had witnessed all that had occurred.
For an instant his eyes blazed at me, but my frankness disarmed his anger, and he broke at last into a rather rueful laugh.
I dare say not. I always thought him sane enough until today, but you can take it from me that either he or I ought to be in a straitjacket.
What's the matter with me, anyhow? You've lived near me for some weeks, Watson. Tell me straight, now!
He can't object to my worldly position, so it must be myself that he has this down on. What has he against me?
I never hurt man or woman in my life that I know of. And yet he would not so much as let me touch the tips of her fingers.
She was glad to meet me, but when she did it was not love that she would talk about, and she wouldn't have let me talk about it either if she could have stopped it.
She kept coming back to it that this was a place of danger, and that she would never be happy until I had left it.
I told her that since I had seen her I was in no hurry to leave it, and that if she really wanted me to go, the only way to work it was for her to arrange to go with me.
With that I offered in as many words to marry her, but before she could answer, down came this brother of hers, running at us with a face on him like a madman.
He was just white with rage, and those light eyes of his were blazing with fury. What was I doing with the lady?
How dared I offer her attentions which were distasteful to her? Did I think that because I was a baronet I could do what I liked?
That seemed to make the matter no better, so then I lost my temper too, and I answered him rather more hotly than I should perhaps, considering that she was standing by.
So it ended by his going off with her, as you saw, and here am I as badly puzzled a man as any in this county.
That his advances should be rejected so brusquely without any reference to the lady's own wishes and that the lady should accept the situation without protest is very amazing.
However, our conjectures were set at rest by a visit from Stapleton himself that very afternoon. He had come to offer apologies for his rudeness of the morning, and after a long private interview with Sir Henry in his study the upshot of their conversation was that the breach is quite healed, and that we are to dine at Merripit House next Friday as a sign of it.
"I don't say now that he isn't a crazy man," said Sir Henry; "I can't forget the look in his eyes when he ran at me this morning, but I must allow that no man could make a more handsome apology than he has done."
His sister is everything in his life, he says. That is natural enough, and I am glad that he should understand her value.
They have always been together, and according to his account he has been a very lonely man with only her as a companion, so that the thought of losing her was really terrible to him.
So there is one of our small mysteries cleared up. It is something to have touched bottom anywhere in this bog in which we are floundering.
We know now why Stapleton looked with disfavour upon his sister's suitor-even when that suitor was so eligible a one as Sir Henry.
Congratulate me, my dear Holmes, and tell me that I have not disappointed you as an agent-that you do not regret the confidence which you showed in me when you sent me down.
I have said "by one night's work," but, in truth, it was by two nights' work, for on the first we drew entirely blank.
I sat up with Sir Henry in his rooms until nearly three o'clock in the morning, but no sound of any sort did we hear except the chiming clock upon the stairs.
It was a most melancholy vigil and ended by each of us falling asleep in our chairs. Fortunately we were not discouraged, and we determined to try again.
One struck, and two, and we had almost for the second time given it up in despair when in an instant we both sat bolt upright in our chairs with all our weary senses keenly on the alert once more.
Very stealthily we heard it pass along until it died away in the distance. Then the baronet gently opened his door and we set out in pursuit.
Already our man had gone round the gallery and the corridor was all in darkness. Softly we stole along until we had come into the other wing.
We were just in time to catch a glimpse of the tall, black-bearded figure, his shoulders rounded as he tiptoed down the passage.
Then he passed through the same door as before, and the light of the candle framed it in the darkness and shot one single yellow beam across the gloom of the corridor.
We shuffled cautiously towards it, trying every plank before we dared to put our whole weight upon it.
We had taken the precaution of leaving our boots behind us, but, even so, the old boards snapped and creaked beneath our tread.
Sometimes it seemed impossible that he should fail to hear our approach. However, the man is fortunately rather deaf, and he was entirely preoccupied in that which he was doing.
When at last we reached the door and peeped through we found him crouching at the window, candle in hand, his white, intent face pressed against the pane, exactly as I had seen him two nights before.
We had arranged no plan of campaign, but the baronet is a man to whom the most direct way is always the most natural.
He walked into the room, and as he did so Barrymore sprang up from the window with a sharp hiss of his breath and stood, livid and trembling, before us.
His dark eyes, glaring out of the white mask of his face, were full of horror and astonishment as he gazed from Sir Henry to me.
"Nothing, sir." His agitation was so great that he could hardly speak, and the shadows sprang up and down from the shaking of his candle.
"Look here, Barrymore," said Sir Henry sternly, "we have made up our minds to have the truth out of you, so it will save you trouble to tell it sooner rather than later.
The fellow looked at us in a helpless way, and he wrung his hands together like one who is in the last extremity of doubt and misery.
Don't ask me, Sir Henry-don't ask me! I give you my word, sir, that it is not my secret, and that I cannot tell it.
"He must have been holding it as a signal," said I. "Let us see if there is any answer." I held it as he had done, and stared out into the darkness of the night.
Vaguely I could discern the black bank of the trees and the lighter expanse of the moor, for the moon was behind the clouds.
And then I gave a cry of exultation, for a tiny pinpoint of yellow light had suddenly transfixed the dark veil, and glowed steadily in the centre of the black square framed by the window.
"Move your light across the window, Watson!" cried the baronet. "See, the other moves also! Now, you rascal, do you deny that it is a signal?
And you go in disgrace. By thunder, you may well be ashamed of yourself. Your family has lived with mine for over a hundred years under this roof, and here I find you deep in some dark plot against me.
"No, no, sir; no, not against you!" It was a woman's voice, and Mrs. Barrymore, paler and more horror-struck than her husband, was standing at the door.
Her bulky figure in a shawl and skirt might have been comic were it not for the intensity of feeling upon her face.
Oh, John, John, have I brought you to this? It is my doing, Sir Henry-all mine. He has done nothing except for my sake and because I asked him.
My unhappy brother is starving on the moor. We cannot let him perish at our very gates. The light is a signal to him that food is ready for him, and his light out yonder is to show the spot to which to bring it.
"That's the truth, sir," said Barrymore. "I said that it was not my secret and that I could not tell it to you.
This, then, was the explanation of the stealthy expeditions at night and the light at the window. Sir Henry and I both stared at the woman in amazement.
Was it possible that this stolidly respectable person was of the same blood as one of the most notorious criminals in the country?
Then as he grew older he met wicked companions, and the devil entered into him until he broke my mother's heart and dragged our name in the dirt.
But every second night we made sure if he was still there by putting a light in the window, and if there was an answer my husband took out some bread and meat to him.
Every day we hoped that he was gone, but as long as he was there we could not desert him. That is the whole truth, as I am an honest Christian woman and you will see that if there is blame in the matter it does not lie with my husband but with me, for whose sake he has done all that he has.
Well, I cannot blame you for standing by your own wife. Forget what I have said. Go to your room, you two, and we shall talk further about this matter in the morning.
When they were gone we looked out of the window again. Sir Henry had flung it open, and the cold night wind beat in upon our faces.
Well, it cannot be far if Barrymore had to carry out the food to it. And he is waiting, this villain, beside that candle.
The same thought had crossed my own mind. It was not as if the Barrymores had taken us into their confidence.
Their secret had been forced from them. The man was a danger to the community, an unmitigated scoundrel for whom there was neither pity nor excuse.
We were only doing our duty in taking this chance of putting him back where he could do no harm. With his brutal and violent nature, others would have to pay the price if we held our hands.
Any night, for example, our neighbours the Stapletons might be attacked by him, and it may have been the thought of this which made Sir Henry so keen upon the adventure.
Then get your revolver and put on your boots. The sooner we start the better, as the fellow may put out his light and be off.
In five minutes we were outside the door, starting upon our expedition. We hurried through the dark shrubbery, amid the dull moaning of the autumn wind and the rustle of the falling leaves.
We must close in on him rapidly, for he is said to be a desperate fellow. We shall take him by surprise and have him at our mercy before he can resist.
"I say, Watson," said the baronet, "what would Holmes say to this? How about that hour of darkness in which the power of evil is exalted?"
As if in answer to his words there rose suddenly out of the vast gloom of the moor that strange cry which I had already heard upon the borders of the great Grimpen Mire.
It came with the wind through the silence of the night, a long, deep mutter, then a rising howl, and then the sad moan in which it died away.
Again and again it sounded, the whole air throbbing with it, strident, wild, and menacing. The baronet caught my sleeve and his face glimmered white through the darkness.
It died away, and an absolute silence closed in upon us. We stood straining our ears, but nothing came.
My blood ran cold in my veins, for there was a break in his voice which told of the sudden horror which had seized him.
Well, it was up there. Come now, Watson, didn't you think yourself that it was the cry of a hound? I am not a child.
No, no, it was a hound. My God, can there be some truth in all these stories? Is it possible that I am really in danger from so dark a cause?
And yet it was one thing to laugh about it in London, and it is another to stand out here in the darkness of the moor and to hear such a cry as that.
And my uncle! There was the footprint of the hound beside him as he lay. It all fits together. I don't think that I am a coward, Watson, but that sound seemed to freeze my very blood.
No, by thunder; we have come out to get our man, and we will do it. We after the convict, and a hell-hound, as likely as not, after us.
We stumbled slowly along in the darkness, with the black loom of the craggy hills around us, and the yellow speck of light burning steadily in front.
A boulder of granite concealed our approach, and crouching behind it we gazed over it at the signal light.
It was strange to see this single candle burning there in the middle of the moor, with no sign of life near it-just the one straight yellow flame and the gleam of the rock on each side of it.
Foul with mire, with a bristling beard, and hung with matted hair, it might well have belonged to one of those old savages who dwelt in the burrows on the hillsides.
The light beneath him was reflected in his small, cunning eyes which peered fiercely to right and left through the darkness like a crafty and savage animal who has heard the steps of the hunters.
Any instant he might dash out the light and vanish in the darkness. I sprang forward therefore, and Sir Henry did the same.
At the same moment the convict screamed out a curse at us and hurled a rock which splintered up against the boulder which had sheltered us.
I caught one glimpse of his short, squat, strongly built figure as he sprang to his feet and turned to run.
A lucky long shot of my revolver might have crippled him, but I had brought it only to defend myself if attacked and not to shoot an unarmed man who was running away.
We were both swift runners and in fairly good training, but we soon found that we had no chance of overtaking him.
We saw him for a long time in the moonlight until he was only a small speck moving swiftly among the boulders upon the side of a distant hill.
We ran and ran until we were completely blown, but the space between us grew ever wider. Finally we stopped and sat panting on two rocks, while we watched him disappearing in the distance.
And it was at this moment that there occurred a most strange and unexpected thing. We had risen from our rocks and were turning to go home, having abandoned the hopeless chase.
The moon was low upon the right, and the jagged pinnacle of a granite tor stood up against the lower curve of its silver disc.
There, outlined as black as an ebony statue on that shining background, I saw the figure of a man upon the tor.
Do not think that it was a delusion, Holmes. I assure you that I have never in my life seen anything more clearly.
He might have been the very spirit of that terrible place. It was not the convict. This man was far from the place where the latter had disappeared.
Besides, he was a much taller man. With a cry of surprise I pointed him out to the baronet, but in the instant during which I had turned to grasp his arm the man was gone.
There was the sharp pinnacle of granite still cutting the lower edge of the moon, but its peak bore no trace of that silent and motionless figure.
He had not seen this lonely man upon the tor and could not feel the thrill which his strange presence and his commanding attitude had given to me.
"A warder, no doubt," said he. "The moor has been thick with them since this fellow escaped." Well, perhaps his explanation may be the right one, but I should like to have some further proof of it.
Such are the adventures of last night, and you must acknowledge, my dear Holmes, that I have done you very well in the matter of a report.
We are certainly making some progress. So far as the Barrymores go we have found the motive of their actions, and that has cleared up the situation very much.
But the moor with its mysteries and its strange inhabitants remains as inscrutable as ever. Perhaps in my next I may be able to throw some light upon this also.
Best of all would it be if you could come down to us. In any case you will hear from me again in the course of the next few days.
So far I have been able to quote from the reports which I have forwarded during these early days to Sherlock Holmes.
Now, however, I have arrived at a point in my narrative where I am compelled to abandon this method and to trust once more to my recollections, aided by the diary which I kept at the time.
A few extracts from the latter will carry me on to those scenes which are indelibly fixed in every detail upon my memory.
I proceed, then, from the morning which followed our abortive chase of the convict and our other strange experiences upon the moor.
It is melancholy outside and in. The baronet is in a black reaction after the excitements of the night.
I am conscious myself of a weight at my heart and a feeling of impending danger-ever present danger, which is the more terrible because I am unable to define it.
And have I not cause for such a feeling? Consider the long sequence of incidents which have all pointed to some sinister influence which is at work around us.
Twice I have with my own ears heard the sound which resembled the distant baying of a hound. It is incredible, impossible, that it should really be outside the ordinary laws of nature.
A spectral hound which leaves material footmarks and fills the air with its howling is surely not to be thought of.
Stapleton may fall in with such a superstition, and Mortimer also, but if I have one quality upon earth it is common sense, and nothing will persuade me to believe in such a thing.
To do so would be to descend to the level of these poor peasants, who are not content with a mere fiend dog but must needs describe him with hell-fire shooting from his mouth and eyes.
Holmes would not listen to such fancies, and I am his agent. But facts are facts, and I have twice heard this crying upon the moor.
Suppose that there were really some huge hound loose upon it; that would go far to explain everything.
But where could such a hound lie concealed, where did it get its food, where did it come from, how was it that no one saw it by day?
This at least was real, but it might have been the work of a protecting friend as easily as of an enemy.
Where is that friend or enemy now? Has he remained in London, or has he followed us down here? Could he-could he be the stranger whom I saw upon the tor?
It is true that I have had only the one glance at him, and yet there are some things to which I am ready to swear.
He is no one whom I have seen down here, and I have now met all the neighbours. The figure was far taller than that of Stapleton, far thinner than that of Frankland.
Barrymore it might possibly have been, but we had left him behind us, and I am certain that he could not have followed us.
A stranger then is still dogging us, just as a stranger dogged us in London. We have never shaken him off.
If I could lay my hands upon that man, then at last we might find ourselves at the end of all our difficulties.
My first impulse was to tell Sir Henry all my plans. My second and wisest one is to play my own game and speak as little as possible to anyone.
He is silent and distrait. His nerves have been strangely shaken by that sound upon the moor. I will say nothing to add to his anxieties, but I will take my own steps to attain my own end.
We had a small scene this morning after breakfast. Barrymore asked leave to speak with Sir Henry, and they were closeted in his study some little time.
Sitting in the billiard-room I more than once heard the sound of voices raised, and I had a pretty good idea what the point was which was under discussion.
After a time the baronet opened his door and called for me. "Barrymore considers that he has a grievance," he said.
He thinks that it was unfair on our part to hunt his brother-in-law down when he, of his own free will, had told us the secret.
"If you had told us of your own free will it would have been a different thing," said the baronet, "you only told us, or rather your wife only told us, when it was forced from you and you could not help yourself."
The man is a public danger. There are lonely houses scattered over the moor, and he is a fellow who would stick at nothing.
You only want to get a glimpse of his face to see that. Look at Mr. Stapleton's house, for example, with no one but himself to defend it.
He'll break into no house, sir. I give you my solemn word upon that. But he will never trouble anyone in this country again.
I assure you, Sir Henry, that in a very few days the necessary arrangements will have been made and he will be on his way to South America.
For God's sake, sir, I beg of you not to let the police know that he is still on the moor. They have given up the chase there, and he can lie quiet until the ship is ready for him.
You can't tell on him without getting my wife and me into trouble. I beg you, sir, to say nothing to the police.
I shrugged my shoulders. "If he were safely out of the country it would relieve the tax-payer of a burden."
He would not do anything so mad, sir. We have provided him with all that he can want. To commit a crime would be to show where he was hiding.
God bless you, sir, and thank you from my heart! It would have killed my poor wife had he been taken again.
I guess we are aiding and abetting a felony, Watson? But, after what we have heard I don't feel as if I could give the man up, so there is an end of it.
But that morning, as it chanced, there was only this one letter, so I took the more notice of it. It was from Coombe Tracey, and it was addressed in a woman's hand.
The greater part of it was charred to pieces, but one little slip, the end of a page, hung together, and the writing could still be read, though it was grey on a black ground.
It seemed to us to be a postscript at the end of the letter and it said: 'Please, please, as you are a gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o clock.
Well, sir, I took no particular notice of his letters. I should not have noticed this one, only it happened to come alone.
No, sir. No more than you have. But I expect if we could lay our hands upon that lady we should know more about Sir Charles's death.
Well, sir, it was immediately after that our own trouble came to us. And then again, sir, we were both of us very fond of Sir Charles, as we well might be considering all that he has done for us.
To rake this up couldn't help our poor master, and it's well to go carefully when there's a lady in the case.
Well, sir, I thought no good could come of it. But now you have been kind to us, and I feel as if it would be treating you unfairly not to tell you all that I know about the matter.
"Very good, Barrymore; you can go." When the butler had left us Sir Henry turned to me. "Well, Watson, what do you think of this new light?"
So I think. But if we can only trace L. L. it should clear up the whole business. We have gained that much.
We know that there is someone who has the facts if we can only find her. What do you think we should do?
Let Holmes know all about it at once. It will give him the clue for which he has been seeking. I am much mistaken if it does not bring him down.
No doubt his blackmailing case is absorbing all his faculties. And yet this new factor must surely arrest his attention and renew his interest.
October 17_th_.-All day today the rain poured down, rustling on the ivy and dripping from the eaves. I thought of the convict out upon the bleak, cold, shelterless moor.
Poor devil! Whatever his crimes, he has suffered something to atone for them. And then I thought of that other one-the face in the cab, the figure against the moon.
Rain squalls drifted across their russet face, and the heavy, slate-coloured clouds hung low over the landscape, trailing in grey wreaths down the sides of the fantastic hills.
In the distant hollow on the left, half hidden by the mist, the two thin towers of Baskerville Hall rose above the trees.
They were the only signs of human life which I could see, save only those prehistoric huts which lay thickly upon the slopes of the hills.
As I walked back I was overtaken by Dr. Mortimer driving in his dog-cart over a rough moorland track which led from the outlying farmhouse of Foulmire.
He has been very attentive to us, and hardly a day has passed that he has not called at the Hall to see how we were getting on.
He insisted upon my climbing into his dog-cart, and he gave me a lift homeward. I found him much troubled over the disappearance of his little spaniel.
It had wandered on to the moor and had never come back. I gave him such consolation as I might, but I thought of the pony on the Grimpen Mire, and I do not fancy that he will see his little dog again.
"By the way, Mortimer," said I as we jolted along the rough road, "I suppose there are few people living within driving distance of this whom you do not know?"
"No," said he. "There are a few gipsies and labouring folk for whom I can't answer, but among the farmers or gentry there is no one whose initials are those.
Wait a bit though," he added after a pause. "There is Laura Lyons-her initials are L. L.-but she lives in Coombe Tracey."
Exactly. She married an artist named Lyons, who came sketching on the moor. He proved to be a blackguard and deserted her.
I fancy old Frankland allows her a pittance, but it cannot be more, for his own affairs are considerably involved.
Whatever she may have deserved one could not allow her to go hopelessly to the bad. Her story got about, and several of the people here did something to enable her to earn an honest living.
Stapleton did for one, and Sir Charles for another. I gave a trifle myself. It was to set her up in a typewriting business.
He wanted to know the object of my inquiries, but I managed to satisfy his curiosity without telling him too much, for there is no reason why we should take anyone into our confidence.
I have only one other incident to record upon this tempestuous and melancholy day. This was my conversation with Barrymore just now, which gives me one more strong card which I can play in due time.
I don't know, sir. I hope to heaven that he has gone, for he has brought nothing but trouble here! I've not heard of him since I left out food for him last, and that was three days ago.
Selden told me of him, sir, a week ago or more. He's in hiding, too, but he's not a convict as far as I can make out.
I don't like it, Dr. Watson-I tell you straight, sir, that I don't like it." He spoke with a sudden passion of earnestness.
Now, listen to me, Barrymore! I have no interest in this matter but that of your master. I have come here with no object except to help him.
Barrymore hesitated for a moment, as if he regretted his outburst or found it difficult to express his own feelings in words.
"It's all these goings-on, sir," he cried at last, waving his hand towards the rain-lashed window which faced the moor.
There's foul play somewhere, and there's black villainy brewing, to that I'll swear! Very glad I should be, sir, to see Sir Henry on his way back to London again!
Look at Sir Charles's death! That was bad enough, for all that the coroner said. Look at the noises on the moor at night.
There's not a man would cross it after sundown if he was paid for it. Look at this stranger hiding out yonder, and watching and waiting!
What's he waiting for? What does it mean? It means no good to anyone of the name of Baskerville, and very glad I shall be to be quit of it all on the day that Sir Henry's new servants are ready to take over the Hall.
"But about this stranger," said I. "Can you tell me anything about him? What did Selden say? Did he find out where he hid, or what he was doing?"
He saw him once or twice, but he is a deep one and gives nothing away. At first he thought that he was the police, but soon he found that he had some lay of his own.
Selden found out that he has got a lad who works for him and brings all he needs. I dare say he goes to Coombe Tracey for what he wants.
It is a wild night indoors, and what must it be in a stone hut upon the moor. What passion of hatred can it be which leads a man to lurk in such a place at such a time!
And what deep and earnest purpose can he have which calls for such a trial! There, in that hut upon the moor, seems to lie the very centre of that problem which has vexed me so sorely.
I swear that another day shall not have passed before I have done all that man can do to reach the heart of the mystery.
The incidents of the next few days are indelibly graven upon my recollection, and I can tell them without reference to the notes made at the time.
With these two facts in my possession I felt that either my intelligence or my courage must be deficient if I could not throw some further light upon these dark places.
I had no opportunity to tell the baronet what I had learned about Mrs. Lyons upon the evening before, for Dr. Mortimer remained with him at cards until it was very late.
At breakfast, however, I informed him about my discovery and asked him whether he would care to accompany me to Coombe Tracey.
At first he was very eager to come, but on second thoughts it seemed to both of us that if I went alone the results might be better.
The more formal we made the visit the less information we might obtain. I left Sir Henry behind, therefore, not without some prickings of conscience, and drove off upon my new quest.
When I reached Coombe Tracey I told Perkins to put up the horses, and I made inquiries for the lady whom I had come to interrogate.
Her face fell, however, when she saw that I was a stranger, and she sat down again and asked me the object of my visit.
But these, of course, are afterthoughts. At the moment I was simply conscious that I was in the presence of a very handsome woman, and that she was asking me the reasons for my visit.
It was a clumsy introduction, and the lady made me feel it. "There is nothing in common between my father and me," she said.
I owe him nothing, and his friends are not mine. If it were not for the late Sir Charles Baskerville and some other kind hearts I might have starved for all that my father cared.
"What can I tell you about him?" she asked, and her fingers played nervously over the stops of her typewriter.
I have already said that I owe a great deal to his kindness. If I am able to support myself it is largely due to the interest which he took in my unhappy situation.
The object is to avoid a public scandal. It is better that I should ask them here than that the matter should pass outside our control.
She was silent and her face was still very pale. At last she looked up with something reckless and defiant in her manner.
Yes, once or twice, when he came into Coombe Tracey. He was a very retiring man, and he preferred to do good by stealth.
But if you saw him so seldom and wrote so seldom, how did he know enough about your affairs to be able to help you, as you say that he has done?
There were several gentlemen who knew my sad history and united to help me. One was Mr. Stapleton, a neighbour and intimate friend of Sir Charles's.
I knew already that Sir Charles Baskerville had made Stapleton his almoner upon several occasions, so the lady's statement bore the impress of truth upon it.
The flush had faded in an instant, and a deathly face was before me. Her dry lips could not speak the "No" which I saw rather than heard.
"Surely your memory deceives you," said I. "I could even quote a passage of your letter. It ran 'Please, please, as you are a gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o'clock.'"
You do Sir Charles an injustice. He did burn the letter. But sometimes a letter may be legible even when burned.
"Yes, I did write it," she cried, pouring out her soul in a torrent of words. "I did write it. Why should I deny it?
I have no reason to be ashamed of it. I wished him to help me. I believed that if I had an interview I could gain his help, so I asked him to meet me.
Because I had only just learned that he was going to London next day and might be away for months. There were reasons why I could not get there earlier.
You acknowledge then that you made an appointment with Sir Charles at the very hour and place at which he met his death, but you deny that you kept the appointment.
If I have to call in the aid of the police you will find how seriously you are compromised. If your position is innocent, why did you in the first instance deny having written to Sir Charles upon that date?
Because I feared that some false conclusion might be drawn from it and that I might find myself involved in a scandal.
I quoted the postscript. The letter had, as I said, been burned and it was not all legible. I ask you once again why it was that you were so pressing that Sir Charles should destroy this letter which he received on the day of his death.
I will tell you, then. If you have heard anything of my unhappy history you will know that I made a rash marriage and had reason to regret it.
My life has been one incessant persecution from a husband whom I abhor. The law is upon his side, and every day I am faced by the possibility that he may force me to live with him.
At the time that I wrote this letter to Sir Charles I had learned that there was a prospect of my regaining my freedom if certain expenses could be met.
It meant everything to me-peace of mind, happiness, self-respect-everything. I knew Sir Charles's generosity, and I thought that if he heard the story from my own lips he would help me.
The woman's story hung coherently together, and all my questions were unable to shake it. I could only check it by finding if she had, indeed, instituted divorce proceedings against her husband at or about the time of the tragedy.
Such an excursion could not be kept secret. The probability was, therefore, that she was telling the truth, or, at least, a part of the truth.
I came away baffled and disheartened. Once again I had reached that dead wall which seemed to be built across every path by which I tried to get at the object of my mission.
And yet the more I thought of the lady's face and of her manner the more I felt that something was being held back from me.
Why should she turn so pale? Why should she fight against every admission until it was forced from her?
Why should she have been so reticent at the time of the tragedy? Surely the explanation of all this could not be as innocent as she would have me believe.
For the moment I could proceed no farther in that direction, but must turn back to that other clue which was to be sought for among the stone huts upon the moor.
And that was a most vague direction. I realised it as I drove back and noted how hill after hill showed traces of the ancient people.
Barrymore's only indication had been that the stranger lived in one of these abandoned huts, and many hundreds of them are scattered throughout the length and breadth of the moor.
But I had my own experience for a guide since it had shown me the man himself standing upon the summit of the Black Tor.
That, then, should be the centre of my search. From there I should explore every hut upon the moor until I lighted upon the right one.
If this man were inside it I should find out from his own lips, at the point of my revolver if necessary, who he was and why he had dogged us so long.
He might slip away from us in the crowd of Regent Street, but it would puzzle him to do so upon the lonely moor.
On the other hand, if I should find the hut and its tenant should not be within it I must remain there, however long the vigil, until he returned.
Holmes had missed him in London. It would indeed be a triumph for me if I could run him to earth where my master had failed.
Luck had been against us again and again in this inquiry, but now at last it came to my aid. And the messenger of good fortune was none other than Mr. Frankland, who was standing, grey-whiskered and red-faced, outside the gate of his garden, which opened on to the highroad along which I travelled.
"Good-day, Dr. Watson," cried he with unwonted good humour, "you must really give your horses a rest and come in to have a glass of wine and to congratulate me."
I alighted and sent a message to Sir Henry that I should walk over in time for dinner. Then I followed Frankland into his dining-room.
"It is a great day for me, sir-one of the red-letter days of my life," he cried with many chuckles. "I have brought off a double event.
I mean to teach them in these parts that law is law, and that there is a man here who does not fear to invoke it.
I have established a right of way through the centre of old Middleton's park, slap across it, sir, within a hundred yards of his own front door.
What do you think of that? We'll teach these magnates that they cannot ride roughshod over the rights of the commoners, confound them!
Both cases decided, Dr. Watson, and both in my favour. I haven't had such a day since I had Sir John Morland for trespass because he shot in his own warren.
Look it up in the books, sir. It will repay reading-Frankland _v_. Morland, Court of Queen's Bench. It cost me £200, but I got my verdict.
None, sir, none. I am proud to say that I had no interest in the matter. I act entirely from a sense of public duty.
I have no doubt, for example, that the Fernworthy people will burn me in effigy tonight. I told the police last time they did it that they should stop these disgraceful exhibitions.
The County Constabulary is in a scandalous state, sir, and it has not afforded me the protection to which I am entitled.
The case of Frankland _v_. Regina will bring the matter before the attention of the public. I told them that they would have occasion to regret their treatment of me, and already my words have come true.
The old man put on a very knowing expression. "Because I could tell them what they are dying to know; but nothing would induce me to help the rascals in any way."
I had been casting round for some excuse by which I could get away from his gossip, but now I began to wish to hear more of it.
I had seen enough of the contrary nature of the old sinner to understand that any strong sign of interest would be the surest way to stop his confidences.
I may not know exactly where he is, but I am quite sure that I could help the police to lay their hands on him.
Has it never struck you that the way to catch that man was to find out where he got his food and so trace it to him?
He certainly seemed to be getting uncomfortably near the truth. "No doubt," said I; "but how do you know that he is anywhere upon the moor?"
My heart sank for Barrymore. It was a serious thing to be in the power of this spiteful old busybody.
You'll be surprised to hear that his food is taken to him by a child. I see him every day through my telescope upon the roof.
He passes along the same path at the same hour, and to whom should he be going except to the convict?
Here was luck indeed! And yet I suppressed all appearance of interest. A child! Barrymore had said that our unknown was supplied by a boy.
It was on his track, and not upon the convict's, that Frankland had stumbled. If I could get his knowledge it might save me a long and weary hunt.
I should say that it was much more likely that it was the son of one of the moorland shepherds taking out his father's dinner.
The least appearance of opposition struck fire out of the old autocrat. His eyes looked malignantly at me, and his grey whiskers bristled like those of an angry cat.
"Indeed, sir!" said he, pointing out over the wide-stretching moor. "Do you see that Black Tor over yonder?
Well, do you see the low hill beyond with the thornbush upon it? It is the stoniest part of the whole moor.
Is that a place where a shepherd would be likely to take his station? Your suggestion, sir, is a most absurd one.
I meekly answered that I had spoken without knowing all the facts. My submission pleased him and led him to further confidences.
You may be sure, sir, that I have very good grounds before I come to an opinion. I have seen the boy again and again with his bundle.
Every day, and sometimes twice a day, I have been able-but wait a moment, Dr. Watson. Do my eyes deceive me, or is there at the present moment something moving upon that hillside?
It was several miles off, but I could distinctly see a small dark dot against the dull green and grey.
"Come, sir, come!" cried Frankland, rushing upstairs. "You will see with your own eyes and judge for yourself."
The telescope, a formidable instrument mounted upon a tripod, stood upon the flat leads of the house.
There he was, sure enough, a small urchin with a little bundle upon his shoulder, toiling slowly up the hill.
When he reached the crest I saw the ragged uncouth figure outlined for an instant against the cold blue sky.
He looked round him with a furtive and stealthy air, as one who dreads pursuit. Then he vanished over the hill.
And what the errand is even a county constable could guess. But not one word shall they have from me, and I bind you to secrecy also, Dr. Watson.
They have treated me shamefully-shamefully. When the facts come out in Frankland _v_. Regina I venture to think that a thrill of indignation will run through the country.
Nothing would induce me to help the police in any way. For all they cared it might have been me, instead of my effigy, which these rascals burned at the stake.
But I resisted all his solicitations and succeeded in dissuading him from his announced intention of walking home with me.
I kept the road as long as his eye was on me, and then I struck off across the moor and made for the stony hill over which the boy had disappeared.
Everything was working in my favour, and I swore that it should not be through lack of energy or perseverance that I should miss the chance which fortune had thrown in my way.
The sun was already sinking when I reached the summit of the hill, and the long slopes beneath me were all golden-green on one side and grey shadow on the other.
A haze lay low upon the farthest sky-line, out of which jutted the fantastic shapes of Belliver and Vixen Tor.
Over the wide expanse there was no sound and no movement. One great grey bird, a gull or curlew, soared aloft in the blue heaven.
He and I seemed to be the only living things between the huge arch of the sky and the desert beneath it.
The barren scene, the sense of loneliness, and the mystery and urgency of my task all struck a chill into my heart.
My heart leaped within me as I saw it. This must be the burrow where the stranger lurked. At last my foot was on the threshold of his hiding place-his secret was within my grasp.
As I approached the hut, walking as warily as Stapleton would do when with poised net he drew near the settled butterfly, I satisfied myself that the place had indeed been used as a habitation.
A vague pathway among the boulders led to the dilapidated opening which served as a door. All was silent within.
The unknown might be lurking there, or he might be prowling on the moor. My nerves tingled with the sense of adventure.
Throwing aside my cigarette, I closed my hand upon the butt of my revolver and, walking swiftly up to the door, I looked in.
But there were ample signs that I had not come upon a false scent. This was certainly where the man lived.
Some blankets rolled in a waterproof lay upon that very stone slab upon which Neolithic man had once slumbered.
The ashes of a fire were heaped in a rude grate. Beside it lay some cooking utensils and a bucket half-full of water.
In the middle of the hut a flat stone served the purpose of a table, and upon this stood a small cloth bundle-the same, no doubt, which I had seen through the telescope upon the shoulder of the boy.
I raised it, and this was what I read, roughly scrawled in pencil: "Dr. Watson has gone to Coombe Tracey."
For a minute I stood there with the paper in my hands thinking out the meaning of this curt message. It was I, then, and not Sir Henry, who was being dogged by this secret man.
He had not followed me himself, but he had set an agent-the boy, perhaps-upon my track, and this was his report.
Possibly I had taken no step since I had been upon the moor which had not been observed and reported.
Always there was this feeling of an unseen force, a fine net drawn round us with infinite skill and delicacy, holding us so lightly that it was only at some supreme moment that one realised that one was indeed entangled in its meshes.
When I thought of the heavy rains and looked at the gaping roof I understood how strong and immutable must be the purpose which had kept him in that inhospitable abode.
Was he our malignant enemy, or was he by chance our guardian angel? I swore that I would not leave the hut until I knew.
Outside the sun was sinking low and the west was blazing with scarlet and gold. Its reflection was shot back in ruddy patches by the distant pools which lay amid the great Grimpen Mire.
There were the two towers of Baskerville Hall, and there a distant blur of smoke which marked the village of Grimpen.
With tingling nerves but a fixed purpose, I sat in the dark recess of the hut and waited with sombre patience for the coming of its tenant.
And then at last I heard him. Far away came the sharp clink of a boot striking upon a stone. Then another and yet another, coming nearer and nearer.
I shrank back into the darkest corner and cocked the pistol in my pocket, determined not to discover myself until I had an opportunity of seeing something of the stranger.
There was a long pause which showed that he had stopped. Then once more the footsteps approached and a shadow fell across the opening of the hut.
"It is a lovely evening, my dear Watson," said a well-known voice. "I really think that you will be more comfortable outside than in."
I stooped under the rude lintel, and there he sat upon a stone outside, his grey eyes dancing with amusement as they fell upon my astonished features.
He was thin and worn, but clear and alert, his keen face bronzed by the sun and roughened by the wind.
In his tweed suit and cloth cap he looked like any other tourist upon the moor, and he had contrived, with that catlike love of personal cleanliness which was one of his characteristics, that his chin should be as smooth and his linen as perfect as if he were in Baker Street.
The surprise was not all on one side, I assure you. I had no idea that you had found my occasional retreat, still less that you were inside it, until I was within twenty paces of the door.
No, Watson, I fear that I could not undertake to recognize your footprint amid all the footprints of the world.
If you seriously desire to deceive me you must change your tobacconist; for when I see the stub of a cigarette marked Bradley, Oxford Street, I know that my friend Watson is in the neighbourhood.
You will see it there beside the path. You threw it down, no doubt, at that supreme moment when you charged into the empty hut.
I thought as much-and knowing your admirable tenacity I was convinced that you were sitting in ambush, a weapon within reach, waiting for the tenant to return.
Excellent, Watson! And how did you localise me? You saw me, perhaps, on the night of the convict hunt, when I was so imprudent as to allow the moon to rise behind me?
The old gentleman with the telescope, no doubt. I could not make it out when first I saw the light flashing upon the lens.
He rose and peeped into the hut. "Ha, I see that Cartwright has brought up some supplies. What's this paper?
Well done! Our researches have evidently been running on parallel lines, and when we unite our results I expect we shall have a fairly full knowledge of the case.
Well, I am glad from my heart that you are here, for indeed the responsibility and the mystery were both becoming too much for my nerves.
But how in the name of wonder did you come here, and what have you been doing? I thought that you were in Baker Street working out that case of blackmailing.
"Then you use me, and yet do not trust me!" I cried with some bitterness. "I think that I have deserved better at your hands, Holmes."
My dear fellow, you have been invaluable to me in this as in many other cases, and I beg that you will forgive me if I have seemed to play a trick upon you.
In truth, it was partly for your own sake that I did it, and it was my appreciation of the danger which you ran which led me to come down and examine the matter for myself.
Had I been with Sir Henry and you it is confident that my point of view would have been the same as yours, and my presence would have warned our very formidable opponents to be on their guard.
As it is, I have been able to get about as I could not possibly have done had I been living in the Hall, and I remain an unknown factor in the business, ready to throw in all my weight at a critical moment.
I brought Cartwright down with me-you remember the little chap at the express office-and he has seen after my simple wants: a loaf of bread and a clean collar.
What does man want more? He has given me an extra pair of eyes upon a very active pair of feet, and both have been invaluable.
"Then my reports have all been wasted! "-My voice trembled as I recalled the pains and the pride with which I had composed them.
Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and very well thumbed, I assure you. I made excellent arrangements, and they are only delayed one day upon their way.
I must compliment you exceedingly upon the zeal and the intelligence which you have shown over an extraordinarily difficult case.
I was still rather raw over the deception which had been practised upon me, but the warmth of Holmes's praise drove my anger from my mind.
I felt also in my heart that he was right in what he said and that it was really best for our purpose that I should not have known that he was upon the moor.
The sun had set and dusk was settling over the moor. The air had turned chill and we withdrew into the hut for warmth.
There, sitting together in the twilight, I told Holmes of my conversation with the lady. So interested was he that I had to repeat some of it twice before he was satisfied.
"This is most important," said he when I had concluded. "It fills up a gap which I had been unable to bridge in this most complex affair.
There can be no doubt about the matter. They meet, they write, there is a complete understanding between them.
I am giving you some information now, in return for all that you have given me. The lady who has passed here as Miss Stapleton is in reality his wife.
Good heavens, Holmes! Are you sure of what you say? How could he have permitted Sir Henry to fall in love with her?
Sir Henry's falling in love could do no harm to anyone except Sir Henry. He took particular care that Sir Henry did not make love to her, as you have yourself observed.
All my unspoken instincts, my vague suspicions, suddenly took shape and centred upon the naturalist. In that impassive colourless man, with his straw hat and his butterfly-net, I seemed to see something terrible-a creature of infinite patience and craft, with a smiling face and a murderous heart.
The shape of some monstrous villainy, half seen, half guessed, loomed through the darkness which had girt me so long.
Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a true piece of autobiography upon the occasion when he first met you, and I dare say he has many a time regretted it since.
He was once a schoolmaster in the north of England. Now, there is no one more easy to trace than a schoolmaster.
The descriptions agreed. When I learned that the missing man was devoted to entomology the identification was complete.
That is one of the points upon which your own researches have shed a light. Your interview with the lady has cleared the situation very much.
I did not know about a projected divorce between herself and her husband. In that case, regarding Stapleton as an unmarried man, she counted no doubt upon becoming his wife.
Why, then we may find the lady of service. It must be our first duty to see her-both of us-tomorrow. Don't you think, Watson, that you are away from your charge rather long?
The last red streaks had faded away in the west and night had settled upon the moor. A few faint stars were gleaming in a violet sky.
"One last question, Holmes," I said as I rose. "Surely there is no need of secrecy between you and me.
There is but one danger which can threaten us. It is that he should strike before we are ready to do so.
Another day-two at the most-and I have my case complete, but until then guard your charge as closely as ever a fond mother watched her ailing child.
Your mission today has justified itself, and yet I could almost wish that you had not left his side. Hark!
A terrible scream-a prolonged yell of horror and anguish-burst out of the silence of the moor. That frightful cry turned the blood to ice in my veins.
Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark, athletic outline at the door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head thrust forward, his face peering into the darkness.
The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence, but it had pealed out from somewhere far off on the shadowy plain.
"Where is it?" Holmes whispered; and I knew from the thrill of his voice that he, the man of iron, was shaken to the soul.
Again the agonised cry swept through the silent night, louder and much nearer than ever. And a new sound mingled with it, a deep, muttered rumble, musical and yet menacing, rising and falling like the low, constant murmur of the sea.
I saw Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man distracted. He stamped his feet upon the ground.
Fool that I was to hold my hand. And you, Watson, see what comes of abandoning your charge! But, by Heaven, if the worst has happened we'll avenge him!
At every rise Holmes looked eagerly round him, but the shadows were thick upon the moor, and nothing moved upon its dreary face.
A low moan had fallen upon our ears. There it was again upon our left! On that side a ridge of rocks ended in a sheer cliff which overlooked a stone-strewn slope.
On its jagged face was spread-eagled some dark, irregular object. As we ran towards it the vague outline hardened into a definite shape.
It was a prostrate man face downward upon the ground, the head doubled under him at a horrible angle, the shoulders rounded and the body hunched together as if in the act of throwing a somersault.
So grotesque was the attitude that I could not for the instant realise that that moan had been the passing of his soul.
Not a whisper, not a rustle, rose now from the dark figure over which we stooped. Holmes laid his hand upon him and held it up again with an exclamation of horror.
The gleam of the match which he struck shone upon his clotted fingers and upon the ghastly pool which widened slowly from the crushed skull of the victim.
And it shone upon something else which turned our hearts sick and faint within us-the body of Sir Henry Baskerville!
There was no chance of either of us forgetting that peculiar ruddy tweed suit-the very one which he had worn on the first morning that we had seen him in Baker Street.
We caught the one clear glimpse of it, and then the match flickered and went out, even as the hope had gone out of our souls.
"The brute! The brute!" I cried with clenched hands. "Oh Holmes, I shall never forgive myself for having left him to his fate."
I am more to blame than you, Watson. In order to have my case well rounded and complete, I have thrown away the life of my client.
It is the greatest blow which has befallen me in my career. But how could I know-how could I know-that he would risk his life alone upon the moor in the face of all my warnings?
That we should have heard his screams-my God, those screams!-and yet have been unable to save him! Where is this brute of a hound which drove him to his death?
It may be lurking among these rocks at this instant. And Stapleton, where is he? He shall answer for this deed.
But now we have to prove the connection between the man and the beast. Save from what we heard, we cannot even swear to the existence of the latter, since Sir Henry has evidently died from the fall.
We stood with bitter hearts on either side of the mangled body, overwhelmed by this sudden and irrevocable disaster which had brought all our long and weary labours to so piteous an end.
Then as the moon rose we climbed to the top of the rocks over which our poor friend had fallen, and from the summit we gazed out over the shadowy moor, half silver and half gloom.
Far away, miles off, in the direction of Grimpen, a single steady yellow light was shining. It could only come from the lonely abode of the Stapletons.
Our case is not complete. The fellow is wary and cunning to the last degree. It is not what we know, but what we can prove.
There will be plenty for us to do tomorrow. Tonight we can only perform the last offices to our poor friend.
Together we made our way down the precipitous slope and approached the body, black and clear against the silvered stones.
We must send for help, Holmes! We cannot carry him all the way to the Hall. Good heavens, are you mad?
He had uttered a cry and bent over the body. Now he was dancing and laughing and wringing my hand. Could this be my stern, self-contained friend?
With feverish haste we had turned the body over, and that dripping beard was pointing up to the cold, clear moon.
There could be no doubt about the beetling forehead, the sunken animal eyes. It was indeed the same face which had glared upon me in the light of the candle from over the rock-the face of Selden, the criminal.
Then in an instant it was all clear to me. I remembered how the baronet had told me that he had handed his old wardrobe to Barrymore.
Barrymore had passed it on in order to help Selden in his escape. Boots, shirt, cap-it was all Sir Henry's.
The tragedy was still black enough, but this man had at least deserved death by the laws of his country.
There is one very singular thing, however: How came Selden, in the darkness, to know that the hound was on his trail?
To hear a hound upon the moor would not work a hard man like this convict into such a paroxysm of terror that he would risk recapture by screaming wildly for help.
Well, then, why this hound should be loose tonight. I suppose that it does not always run loose upon the moor.
My difficulty is the more formidable of the two, for I think that we shall very shortly get an explanation of yours, while mine may remain forever a mystery.
The question now is, what shall we do with this poor wretch's body? We cannot leave it here to the foxes and the ravens.
Exactly. I have no doubt that you and I could carry it so far. Halloa, Watson, what's this? It's the man himself, by all that's wonderful and audacious!
A figure was approaching us over the moor, and I saw the dull red glow of a cigar. The moon shone upon him, and I could distinguish the dapper shape and jaunty walk of the naturalist.
Why, Dr. Watson, that's not you, is it? You are the last man that I should have expected to see out on the moor at this time of night.
But, dear me, what's this? Somebody hurt? Not-don't tell me that it is our friend Sir Henry!" He hurried past me and stooped over the dead man.
Stapleton turned a ghastly face upon us, but by a supreme effort he had overcome his amazement and his disappointment.
He appears to have broken his neck by falling over these rocks. My friend and I were strolling on the moor when we heard a cry.
Because I had suggested that he should come over. When he did not come I was surprised, and I naturally became alarmed for his safety when I heard cries upon the moor.
By the way"-his eyes darted again from my face to Holmes's-"did you hear anything else besides a cry?"
Oh, you know the stories that the peasants tell about a phantom hound, and so on. It is said to be heard at night upon the moor.
I have no doubt that anxiety and exposure have driven him off his head. He has rushed about the moor in a crazy state and eventually fallen over here and broken his neck.
"That seems the most reasonable theory," said Stapleton, and he gave a sigh which I took to indicate his relief.
We have been expecting you in these parts since Dr. Watson came down. You are in time to see a tragedy.
Yes, indeed. I have no doubt that my friend's explanation will cover the facts. I will take an unpleasant remembrance back to London with me tomorrow.
One cannot always have the success for which one hopes. An investigator needs facts and not legends or rumours.
My friend spoke in his frankest and most unconcerned manner. Stapleton still looked hard at him. Then he turned to me.
I would suggest carrying this poor fellow to my house, but it would give my sister such a fright that I do not feel justified in doing it.
And so it was arranged. Resisting Stapleton's offer of hospitality, Holmes and I set off to Baskerville Hall, leaving the naturalist to return alone.
Looking back we saw the figure moving slowly away over the broad moor, and behind him that one black smudge on the silvered slope which showed where the man was lying who had come so horribly to his end.
"We're at close grips at last," said Holmes as we walked together across the moor. "What a nerve the fellow has!
How he pulled himself together in the face of what must have been a paralyzing shock when he found that the wrong man had fallen a victim to his plot.
I told you in London, Watson, and I tell you now again, that we have never had a foeman more worthy of our steel.
It may cause him to be more cautious, or it may drive him to desperate measures at once. Like most clever criminals, he may be too confident in his own cleverness and imagine that he has completely deceived us.
My dear Watson, you were born to be a man of action. Your instinct is always to do something energetic.
But supposing, for argument's sake, that we had him arrested tonight, what on earth the better off should we be for that?
We could prove nothing against him. There's the devilish cunning of it! If he were acting through a human agent we could get some evidence, but if we were to drag this great dog to the light of day it would not help us in putting a rope round the neck of its master.
Not a shadow of one-only surmise and conjecture. We should be laughed out of court if we came with such a story and such evidence.
Found dead without a mark upon him. You and I know that he died of sheer fright, and we know also what frightened him, but how are we to get twelve stolid jurymen to know it?
What signs are there of a hound? Where are the marks of its fangs? Of course we know that a hound does not bite a dead body and that Sir Charles was dead before ever the brute overtook him.
We are not much better off tonight. Again, there was no direct connection between the hound and the man's death.
We never saw the hound. We heard it, but we could not prove that it was running upon this man's trail.
There is a complete absence of motive. No, my dear fellow; we must reconcile ourselves to the fact that we have no case at present, and that it is worth our while to run any risk in order to establish one.
I have great hopes of what Mrs. Laura Lyons may do for us when the position of affairs is made clear to her.
And I have my own plan as well. Sufficient for tomorrow is the evil thereof; but I hope before the day is past to have the upper hand at last.
I could draw nothing further from him, and he walked, lost in thought, as far as the Baskerville gates.
Yes; I see no reason for further concealment. But one last word, Watson. Say nothing of the hound to Sir Henry.
Let him think that Selden's death was as Stapleton would have us believe. He will have a better nerve for the ordeal which he will have to undergo tomorrow, when he is engaged, if I remember your report aright, to dine with these people.
Then you must excuse yourself and he must go alone. That will be easily arranged. And now, if we are too late for dinner, I think that we are both ready for our suppers.
Sir Henry was more pleased than surprised to see Sherlock Holmes, for he had for some days been expecting that recent events would bring him down from London.
He did raise his eyebrows, however, when he found that my friend had neither any luggage nor any explanations for its absence.
Between us we soon supplied his wants, and then over a belated supper we explained to the baronet as much of our experience as it seemed desirable that he should know.
But first I had the unpleasant duty of breaking the news to Barrymore and his wife. To him it may have been an unmitigated relief, but she wept bitterly in her apron.
To all the world he was the man of violence, half animal and half demon; but to her he always remained the little wilful boy of her own girlhood, the child who had clung to her hand.
"I've been moping in the house all day since Watson went off in the morning," said the baronet. "I guess I should have some credit, for I have kept my promise.
If I hadn't sworn not to go about alone I might have had a more lively evening, for I had a message from Stapleton asking me over there.
"I have no doubt that you would have had a more lively evening," said Holmes drily. "By the way, I don't suppose you appreciate that we have been mourning over you as having broken your neck?"
This poor wretch was dressed in your clothes. I fear your servant who gave them to him may get into trouble with the police.
That's lucky for him-in fact, it's lucky for all of you, since you are all on the wrong side of the law in this matter.
I am not sure that as a conscientious detective my first duty is not to arrest the whole household. Watson's reports are most incriminating documents.
"But how about the case?" asked the baronet. "Have you made anything out of the tangle? I don't know that Watson and I are much the wiser since we came down."
I think that I shall be in a position to make the situation rather more clear to you before long. It has been an exceedingly difficult and most complicated business.
We've had one experience, as Watson has no doubt told you. We heard the hound on the moor, so I can swear that it is not all empty superstition.
I had something to do with dogs when I was out West, and I know one when I hear one. If you can muzzle that one and put him on a chain I'll be ready to swear you are the greatest detective of all time.
If you will do this I think the chances are that our little problem will soon be solved. I have no doubt-
He stopped suddenly and stared fixedly up over my head into the air. The lamp beat upon his face, and so intent was it and so still that it might have been that of a clear-cut classical statue, a personification of alertness and expectation.
I could see as he looked down that he was repressing some internal emotion. His features were still composed, but his eyes shone with amused exultation.
"Excuse the admiration of a connoisseur," said he as he waved his hand towards the line of portraits which covered the opposite wall.
Watson won't allow that I know anything of art but that is mere jealousy because our views upon the subject differ.
I know what is good when I see it, and I see it now. That's a Kneller, I'll swear, that lady in the blue silk over yonder, and the stout gentleman with the wig ought to be a Reynolds.
That is Rear-Admiral Baskerville, who served under Rodney in the West Indies. The man with the blue coat and the roll of paper is Sir William Baskerville, who was Chairman of Committees of the House of Commons under Pitt.
Ah, you have a right to know about him. That is the cause of all the mischief, the wicked Hugo, who started the Hound of the Baskervilles.
"Dear me!" said Holmes, "he seems a quiet, meek-mannered man enough, but I dare say that there was a lurking devil in his eyes.
There's no doubt about the authenticity, for the name and the date, 1647, are on the back of the canvas.
Holmes said little more, but the picture of the old roysterer seemed to have a fascination for him, and his eyes were continually fixed upon it during supper.
It was not until later, when Sir Henry had gone to his room, that I was able to follow the trend of his thoughts.
He led me back into the banqueting-hall, his bedroom candle in his hand, and he held it up against the time-stained portrait on the wall.
I looked at the broad plumed hat, the curling love-locks, the white lace collar, and the straight, severe face which was framed between them.
It was not a brutal countenance, but it was prim, hard, and stern, with a firm-set, thin-lipped mouth, and a coldly intolerant eye.
"Just a suggestion, perhaps. But wait an instant!" He stood upon a chair, and, holding up the light in his left hand, he curved his right arm over the broad hat and round the long ringlets.
Ha, you see it now. My eyes have been trained to examine faces and not their trimmings. It is the first quality of a criminal investigator that he should see through a disguise.
Yes, it is an interesting instance of a throwback, which appears to be both physical and spiritual. A study of family portraits is enough to convert a man to the doctrine of reincarnation.
A pin, a cork, and a card, and we add him to the Baker Street collection!" He burst into one of his rare fits of laughter as he turned away from the picture.
I was up betimes in the morning, but Holmes was afoot earlier still, for I saw him as I dressed, coming up the drive.
"Yes, we should have a full day today," he remarked, and he rubbed his hands with the joy of action. "The nets are all in place, and the drag is about to begin.
We'll know before the day is out whether we have caught our big, lean-jawed pike, or whether he has got through the meshes.
I have sent a report from Grimpen to Princetown as to the death of Selden. I think I can promise that none of you will be troubled in the matter.
And I have also communicated with my faithful Cartwright, who would certainly have pined away at the door of my hut, as a dog does at his master's grave, if I had not set his mind at rest about my safety.
"Good-morning, Holmes," said the baronet. "You look like a general who is planning a battle with his chief of the staff."
I hope that you will come also. They are very hospitable people, and I am sure that they would be very glad to see you.
I hoped that you were going to see me through this business. The Hall and the moor are not very pleasant places when one is alone.
Immediately after breakfast. We will drive in to Coombe Tracey, but Watson will leave his things as a pledge that he will come back to you.
Because it is your post of duty. Because you gave me your word that you would do as you were told, and I tell you to stay.
One more direction! I wish you to drive to Merripit House. Send back your trap, however, and let them know that you intend to walk home.
This time you may do it with safety. If I had not every confidence in your nerve and courage I would not suggest it, but it is essential that you should do it.
And as you value your life do not go across the moor in any direction save along the straight path which leads from Merripit House to the Grimpen Road, and is your natural way home.
Very good. I should be glad to get away as soon after breakfast as possible, so as to reach London in the afternoon.
I was much astounded by this programme, though I remembered that Holmes had said to Stapleton on the night before that his visit would terminate next day.
It had not crossed my mind however, that he would wish me to go with him, nor could I understand how we could both be absent at a moment which he himself declared to be critical.
You will take this train to town, Cartwright. The moment you arrive you will send a wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, in my name, to say that if he finds the pocketbook which I have dropped he is to send it by registered post to Baker Street.
That is in answer to mine of this morning. He is the best of the professionals, I think, and we may need his assistance.
Now, Watson, I think that we cannot employ our time better than by calling upon your acquaintance, Mrs. Laura Lyons.
That telegram from London, if mentioned by Sir Henry to the Stapletons, must remove the last suspicions from their minds.
Mrs. Laura Lyons was in her office, and Sherlock Holmes opened his interview with a frankness and directness which considerably amazed her.
"I am investigating the circumstances which attended the death of the late Sir Charles Baskerville," said he.
My friend here, Dr. Watson, has informed me of what you have communicated, and also of what you have withheld in connection with that matter.
You have confessed that you asked Sir Charles to be at the gate at ten o'clock. We know that that was the place and hour of his death.
In that case the coincidence must indeed be an extraordinary one. But I think that we shall succeed in establishing a connection, after all.
I wish to be perfectly frank with you, Mrs. Lyons. We regard this case as one of murder, and the evidence may implicate not only your friend Mr. Stapleton but his wife as well.
Mrs. Lyons had resumed her seat. Her hands were grasping the arms of her chair, and I saw that the pink nails had turned white with the pressure of her grip.
"I have come prepared to do so," said Holmes, drawing several papers from his pocket. "Here is a photograph of the couple taken in York four years ago.
It is indorsed 'Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,' but you will have no difficulty in recognizing him, and her also, if you know her by sight.
Here are three written descriptions by trustworthy witnesses of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur, who at that time kept St. Oliver's private school.
"Mr. Holmes," she said, "this man had offered me marriage on condition that I could get a divorce from my husband.
He has lied to me, the villain, in every conceivable way. Not one word of truth has he ever told me. And why-why?
I imagined that all was for my own sake. But now I see that I was never anything but a tool in his hands.
Why should I preserve faith with him who never kept any with me? Why should I try to shield him from the consequences of his own wicked acts?
Ask me what you like, and there is nothing which I shall hold back. One thing I swear to you, and that is that when I wrote the letter I never dreamed of any harm to the old gentleman, who had been my kindest friend.
I presume that the reason he gave was that you would receive help from Sir Charles for the legal expenses connected with your divorce?
He told me that it would hurt his self-respect that any other man should find the money for such an object, and that though he was a poor man himself he would devote his last penny to removing the obstacles which divided us.
He appears to be a very consistent character. And then you heard nothing until you read the reports of the death in the paper?
He did. He said that the death was a very mysterious one, and that I should certainly be suspected if the facts came out.
"I think that on the whole you have had a fortunate escape," said Sherlock Holmes. "You have had him in your power and he knew it, and yet you are alive.
You have been walking for some months very near to the edge of a precipice. We must wish you good-morning now, Mrs. Lyons, and it is probable that you will very shortly hear from us again.
"Our case becomes rounded off, and difficulty after difficulty thins away in front of us," said Holmes as we stood waiting for the arrival of the express from town.
I shall soon be in the position of being able to put into a single connected narrative one of the most singular and sensational crimes of modern times.
Even now we have no clear case against this very wily man. But I shall be very much surprised if it is not clear enough before we go to bed this night.
The London express came roaring into the station, and a small, wiry bulldog of a man had sprung from a first-class carriage.
We all three shook hands, and I saw at once from the reverential way in which Lestrade gazed at my companion that he had learned a good deal since the days when they had first worked together.
I could well remember the scorn which the theories of the reasoner used then to excite in the practical man.
One of Sherlock Holmes's defects-if, indeed, one may call it a defect-was that he was exceedingly loath to communicate his full plans to any other person until the instant of their fulfilment.
Partly it came no doubt from his own masterful nature, which loved to dominate and surprise those who were around him.
Partly also from his professional caution, which urged him never to take any chances. The result, however, was very trying for those who were acting as his agents and assistants.
My nerves thrilled with anticipation when at last the cold wind upon our faces and the dark, void spaces on either side of the narrow road told me that we were back upon the moor once again.
Every stride of the horses and every turn of the wheels was taking us nearer to our supreme adventure.
Our conversation was hampered by the presence of the driver of the hired wagonette, so that we were forced to talk of trivial matters when our nerves were tense with emotion and anticipation.
It was a relief to me, after that unnatural restraint, when we at last passed Frankland's house and knew that we were drawing near to the Hall and to the scene of action.
We did not drive up to the door but got down near the gate of the avenue. The wagonette was paid off and ordered to return to Coombe Tracey forthwith, while we started to walk to Merripit House.
The little detective smiled. "As long as I have my trousers I have a hip-pocket, and as long as I have my hip-pocket I have something in it."
"My word, it does not seem a very cheerful place," said the detective with a shiver, glancing round him at the gloomy slopes of the hill and at the huge lake of fog which lay over the Grimpen Mire.
That is Merripit House and the end of our journey. I must request you to walk on tiptoe and not to talk above a whisper.
We moved cautiously along the track as if we were bound for the house, but Holmes halted us when we were about two hundred yards from it.
Yes, we shall make our little ambush here. Get into this hollow, Lestrade. You have been inside the house, have you not, Watson?
The blinds are up. You know the lie of the land best. Creep forward quietly and see what they are doing-but for heaven's sake don't let them know that they are watched!
I tiptoed down the path and stooped behind the low wall which surrounded the stunted orchard. Creeping in its shadow I reached a point whence I could look straight through the uncurtained window.
There were only two men in the room, Sir Henry and Stapleton. They sat with their profiles towards me on either side of the round table.
Both of them were smoking cigars, and coffee and wine were in front of them. Stapleton was talking with animation, but the baronet looked pale and distrait.
Perhaps the thought of that lonely walk across the ill-omened moor was weighing heavily upon his mind.
As I watched them Stapleton rose and left the room, while Sir Henry filled his glass again and leaned back in his chair, puffing at his cigar.
I heard the creak of a door and the crisp sound of boots upon gravel. The steps passed along the path on the other side of the wall under which I crouched.
Looking over, I saw the naturalist pause at the door of an out-house in the corner of the orchard. A key turned in a lock, and as he passed in there was a curious scuffling noise from within.
He was only a minute or so inside, and then I heard the key turn once more and he passed me and reentered the house.
I saw him rejoin his guest, and I crept quietly back to where my companions were waiting to tell them what I had seen.
The moon shone on it, and it looked like a great shimmering ice-field, with the heads of the distant tors as rocks borne upon its surface.
Very serious, indeed-the one thing upon earth which could have disarranged my plans. He can't be very long, now.
It is already ten o'clock. Our success and even his life may depend upon his coming out before the fog is over the path.
The night was clear and fine above us. The stars shone cold and bright, while a half-moon bathed the whole scene in a soft, uncertain light.
Before us lay the dark bulk of the house, its serrated roof and bristling chimneys hard outlined against the silver-spangled sky.
Broad bars of golden light from the lower windows stretched across the orchard and the moor. One of them was suddenly shut off.
The servants had left the kitchen. There only remained the lamp in the dining-room where the two men, the murderous host and the unconscious guest, still chatted over their cigars.
Every minute that white woolly plain which covered one-half of the moor was drifting closer and closer to the house.
Holmes struck his hand passionately upon the rock in front of us and stamped his feet in his impatience.
If he isn't out in a quarter of an hour the path will be covered. In half an hour we won't be able to see our hands in front of us.
So as the fog-bank flowed onward we fell back before it until we were half a mile from the house, and still that dense white sea, with the moon silvering its upper edge, swept slowly and inexorably on.
"We are going too far," said Holmes. "We dare not take the chance of his being overtaken before he can reach us.
At all costs we must hold our ground where we are." He dropped on his knees and clapped his ear to the ground.
A sound of quick steps broke the silence of the moor. Crouching among the stones we stared intently at the silver-tipped bank in front of us.
The steps grew louder, and through the fog, as through a curtain, there stepped the man whom we were awaiting.
He looked round him in surprise as he emerged into the clear, starlit night. Then he came swiftly along the path, passed close to where we lay, and went on up the long slope behind us.
I was at Holmes's elbow, and I glanced for an instant at his face. It was pale and exultant, his eyes shining brightly in the moonlight.
But suddenly they started forward in a rigid, fixed stare, and his lips parted in amazement. At the same instant Lestrade gave a yell of terror and threw himself face downward upon the ground.
I sprang to my feet, my inert hand grasping my pistol, my mind paralyzed by the dreadful shape which had sprung out upon us from the shadows of the fog.
Never in the delirious dream of a disordered brain could anything more savage, more appalling, more hellish be conceived than that dark form and savage face which broke upon us out of the wall of fog.
With long bounds the huge black creature was leaping down the track, following hard upon the footsteps of our friend.
So paralyzed were we by the apparition that we allowed him to pass before we had recovered our nerve.
Then Holmes and I both fired together, and the creature gave a hideous howl, which showed that one at least had hit him.
But that cry of pain from the hound had blown all our fears to the winds. If he was vulnerable he was mortal, and if we could wound him we could kill him.
Never have I seen a man run as Holmes ran that night. I am reckoned fleet of foot, but he outpaced me as much as I outpaced the little professional.
In front of us as we flew up the track we heard scream after scream from Sir Henry and the deep roar of the hound.
I was in time to see the beast spring upon its victim, hurl him to the ground, and worry at his throat.
I stooped, panting, and pressed my pistol to the dreadful, shimmering head, but it was useless to press the trigger.
Sir Henry lay insensible where he had fallen. We tore away his collar, and Holmes breathed a prayer of gratitude when we saw that there was no sign of a wound and that the rescue had been in time.
Already our friend's eyelids shivered and he made a feeble effort to move. Lestrade thrust his brandy-flask between the baronet's teeth, and two frightened eyes were looking up at us.
Even now in the stillness of death, the huge jaws seemed to be dripping with a bluish flame and the small, deep-set, cruel eyes were ringed with fire.
I placed my hand upon the glowing muzzle, and as I held them up my own fingers smouldered and gleamed in the darkness.
"A cunning preparation of it," said Holmes, sniffing at the dead animal. "There is no smell which might have interfered with his power of scent.
We owe you a deep apology, Sir Henry, for having exposed you to this fright. I was prepared for a hound, but not for such a creature as this.
Give me another mouthful of that brandy and I shall be ready for anything. So! Now, if you will help me up.
To leave you here. You are not fit for further adventures tonight. If you will wait, one or other of us will go back with you to the Hall.
He tried to stagger to his feet; but he was still ghastly pale and trembling in every limb. We helped him to a rock, where he sat shivering with his face buried in his hands.
"It's a thousand to one against our finding him at the house," he continued as we retraced our steps swiftly down the path.
He followed the hound to call him off-of that you may be certain. No, no, he's gone by this time! But we'll search the house and make sure.
The front door was open, so we rushed in and hurried from room to room to the amazement of a doddering old manservant, who met us in the passage.
There was no light save in the dining-room, but Holmes caught up the lamp and left no corner of the house unexplored.
No sign could we see of the man whom we were chasing. On the upper floor, however, one of the bedroom doors was locked.
A faint moaning and rustling came from within. Holmes struck the door just over the lock with the flat of his foot and it flew open.
But there was no sign within it of that desperate and defiant villain whom we expected to see. Instead we were faced by an object so strange and so unexpected that we stood for a moment staring at it in amazement.
In the centre of this room there was an upright beam, which had been placed at some period as a support for the old worm-eaten baulk of timber which spanned the roof.
To this post a figure was tied, so swathed and muffled in the sheets which had been used to secure it that one could not for the moment tell whether it was that of a man or a woman.
In a minute we had torn off the gag, unswathed the bonds, and Mrs. Stapleton sank upon the floor in front of us.
"The brute!" cried Holmes. "Here, Lestrade, your brandy-bottle! Put her in the chair! She has fainted from ill-usage and exhaustion."
"Thank God! Thank God! Oh, this villain! See how he has treated me!" She shot her arms out from her sleeves, and we saw with horror that they were all mottled with bruises.
"You bear him no good will, madam," said Holmes. "Tell us then where we shall find him. If you have ever aided him in evil, help us now and so atone."
"There is but one place where he can have fled," she answered. "There is an old tin mine on an island in the heart of the mire.
It was there that he kept his hound and there also he had made preparations so that he might have a refuge.
"He may find his way in, but never out," she cried. "How can he see the guiding wands tonight? We planted them together, he and I, to mark the pathway through the mire.
It was evident to us that all pursuit was in vain until the fog had lifted. Meanwhile we left Lestrade in possession of the house while Holmes and I went back with the baronet to Baskerville Hall.
The story of the Stapletons could no longer be withheld from him, but he took the blow bravely when he learned the truth about the woman whom he had loved.
But the shock of the night's adventures had shattered his nerves, and before morning he lay delirious in a high fever under the care of Dr. Mortimer.
The two of them were destined to travel together round the world before Sir Henry had become once more the hale, hearty man that he had been before he became master of that ill-omened estate.
On the morning after the death of the hound the fog had lifted and we were guided by Mrs. Stapleton to the point where they had found a pathway through the bog.
It helped us to realise the horror of this woman's life when we saw the eagerness and joy with which she laid us on her husband's track.
We left her standing upon the thin peninsula of firm, peaty soil which tapered out into the widespread bog.
Once only we saw a trace that someone had passed that perilous way before us. From amid a tuft of cotton grass which bore it up out of the slime some dark thing was projecting.
Holmes sank to his waist as he stepped from the path to seize it, and had we not been there to drag him out he could never have set his foot upon firm land again.
Exactly. He retained it in his hand after using it to set the hound upon the track. He fled when he knew the game was up, still clutching it.
But no slightest sign of them ever met our eyes. If the earth told a true story, then Stapleton never reached that island of refuge towards which he struggled through the fog upon that last night.
Somewhere in the heart of the great Grimpen Mire, down in the foul slime of the huge morass which had sucked him in, this cold and cruel-hearted man is forever buried.
Many traces we found of him in the bog-girt island where he had hid his savage ally. A huge driving-wheel and a shaft half-filled with rubbish showed the position of an abandoned mine.
Beside it were the crumbling remains of the cottages of the miners, driven away no doubt by the foul reek of the surrounding swamp.
In one of these a staple and chain with a quantity of gnawed bones showed where the animal had been confined.
"A dog!" said Holmes. "By Jove, a curly-haired spaniel. Poor Mortimer will never see his pet again. Well, I do not know that this place contains any secret which we have not already fathomed.
He could hide his hound, but he could not hush its voice, and hence came those cries which even in daylight were not pleasant to hear.
I said it in London, Watson, and I say it again now, that never yet have we helped to hunt down a more dangerous man than he who is lying yonder"-he swept his long arm towards the huge mottled expanse of green-splotched bog which stretched away until it merged into the russet slopes of the moor.
It was the end of November, and Holmes and I sat, upon a raw and foggy night, on either side of a blazing fire in our sitting-room in Baker Street.
Montpensier from the charge of murder which hung over her in connection with the death of her step-daughter, Mlle.
Sir Henry and Dr. Mortimer were, however, in London, on their way to that long voyage which had been recommended for the restoration of his shattered nerves.
They had called upon us that very afternoon, so that it was natural that the subject should come up for discussion.
I have had the advantage of two conversations with Mrs. Stapleton, and the case has now been so entirely cleared up that I am not aware that there is anything which has remained a secret to us.
We had an example of his readiness of resource that morning when he got away from us so successfully, and also of his audacity in sending back my own name to me through the cabman.
From that moment he understood that I had taken over the case in London, and that therefore there was no chance for him there.
"One moment!" said I. "You have, no doubt, described the sequence of events correctly, but there is one point which you have left unexplained.
She was ready to warn Sir Henry so far as she could without implicating her husband, and again and again she tried to do so.
By encouraging the intimacy he made it certain that Sir Henry would frequently come to Merripit House and that he would sooner or later get the opportunity which he desired.
She taxed her husband with his intended crime, and a furious scene followed in which he showed her for the first time that she had a rival in his love.
In this I fancy that in any case he made a miscalculation, and that, if we had not been there, his doom would none the less have been sealed.
A woman of Spanish blood does not condone such an injury so lightly. And now, my dear Watson, without referring to my notes, I cannot give you a more detailed account of this curious case.
The beast was savage and half-starved. If its appearance did not frighten its victim to death, at least it would paralyze the resistance which might be offered.
Mrs. Stapleton has heard her husband discuss the problem on several occasions. There were three possible courses.
I have a box for _Les Huguenots_. Have you heard the De Reszkes? Might I trouble you then to be ready in half an hour, and we can stop at Marcini's for a little dinner on the way?
Chapter I. The Science of Deduction Chapter II. The Statement of the Case Chapter III. In Quest of a Solution Chapter IV.
The Story of the Bald-Headed Man Chapter V. The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge Chapter VI. Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration Chapter VII.
The Episode of the Barrel Chapter VIII. The Baker Street Irregulars Chapter IX. A Break in the Chain Chapter X.
The End of the Islander Chapter XI. The Great Agra Treasure Chapter XII. The Strange Story of Jonathan Small
Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantel-piece and his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case.
With his long, white, nervous fingers he adjusted the delicate needle, and rolled back his left shirt-cuff.
For some little time his eyes rested thoughtfully upon the sinewy forearm and wrist all dotted and scarred with innumerable puncture-marks.
Finally he thrust the sharp point home, pressed down the tiny piston, and sank back into the velvet-lined arm-chair with a long sigh of satisfaction.
Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance, but custom had not reconciled my mind to it.
On the contrary, from day to day I had become more irritable at the sight, and my conscience swelled nightly within me at the thought that I had lacked the courage to protest.
His great powers, his masterly manner, and the experience which I had had of his many extraordinary qualities, all made me diffident and backward in crossing him.
Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the Beaune which I had taken with my lunch, or the additional exasperation produced by the extreme deliberation of his manner, I suddenly felt that I could hold out no longer.
He raised his eyes languidly from the old black-letter volume which he had opened. "It is cocaine," he said,-"a seven-per-cent.
"No, indeed," I answered, brusquely. "My constitution has not got over the Afghan campaign yet. I cannot afford to throw any extra strain upon it."
He smiled at my vehemence. "Perhaps you are right, Watson," he said. "I suppose that its influence is physically a bad one.
I find it, however, so transcendently stimulating and clarifying to the mind that its secondary action is a matter of small moment.
Remember that I speak not only as one comrade to another, but as a medical man to one for whose constitution he is to some extent answerable.
He did not seem offended. On the contrary, he put his finger-tips together and leaned his elbows on the arms of his chair, like one who has a relish for conversation.
"My mind," he said, "rebels at stagnation. Give me problems, give me work, give me the most abstruse cryptogram or the most intricate analysis, and I am in my own proper atmosphere.
I can dispense then with artificial stimulants. But I abhor the dull routine of existence. I crave for mental exaltation.
That is why I have chosen my own particular profession,-or rather created it, for I am the only one in the world.
"The only unofficial consulting detective," he answered. "I am the last and highest court of appeal in detection.
When Gregson or Lestrade or Athelney Jones are out of their depths-which, by the way, is their normal state-the matter is laid before me.
I examine the data, as an expert, and pronounce a specialist's opinion. I claim no credit in such cases.
My name figures in no newspaper. The work itself, the pleasure of finding a field for my peculiar powers, is my highest reward.
"Yes, indeed," said I, cordially. "I was never so struck by anything in my life. I even embodied it in a small brochure with the somewhat fantastic title of 'A Study in Scarlet.'"
You have attempted to tinge it with romanticism, which produces much the same effect as if you worked a love-story or an elopement into the fifth proposition of Euclid.
Some facts should be suppressed, or at least a just sense of proportion should be observed in treating them.
The only point in the case which deserved mention was the curious analytical reasoning from effects to causes by which I succeeded in unraveling it.
More than once during the years that I had lived with him in Baker Street I had observed that a small vanity underlay my companion's quiet and didactic manner.
I made no remark, however, but sat nursing my wounded leg. I had a Jezail bullet through it some time before, and, though it did not prevent me from walking, it ached wearily at every change of the weather.
"My practice has extended recently to the Continent," said Holmes, after a while, filling up his old brier-root pipe.
He has all the Celtic power of quick intuition, but he is deficient in the wide range of exact knowledge which is essential to the higher developments of his art.
Here is the letter which I had this morning acknowledging my assistance." He tossed over, as he spoke, a crumpled sheet of foreign notepaper.
"Oh, he rates my assistance too highly," said Sherlock Holmes, lightly. "He has considerable gifts himself.
He possesses two out of the three qualities necessary for the ideal detective. He has the power of observation and that of deduction.
He is only wanting in knowledge; and that may come in time. He is now translating my small works into French.
"Oh, didn't you know?" he cried, laughing. "Yes, I have been guilty of several monographs. They are all upon technical subjects.
It is a point which is continually turning up in criminal trials, and which is sometimes of supreme importance as a clue.
If you can say definitely, for example, that some murder has been done by a man who was smoking an Indian lunkah, it obviously narrows your field of search.
To the trained eye there is as much difference between the black ash of a Trichinopoly and the white fluff of bird's-eye as there is between a cabbage and a potato.
I appreciate their importance. Here is my monograph upon the tracing of footsteps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaster of Paris as a preserver of impresses.
That is a matter of great practical interest to the scientific detective,-especially in cases of unclaimed bodies, or in discovering the antecedents of criminals.
"Not at all," I answered, earnestly. "It is of the greatest interest to me, especially since I have had the opportunity of observing your practical application of it.
But you spoke just now of observation and deduction. Surely the one to some extent implies the other.
"Why, hardly," he answered, leaning back luxuriously in his arm-chair, and sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe.
For example, observation shows me that you have been to the Wigmore Street Post-Office this morning, but deduction lets me know that when there you dispatched a telegram.
"Right!" said I. "Right on both points! But I confess that I don't see how you arrived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, and I have mentioned it to no one."
"It is simplicity itself," he remarked, chuckling at my surprise,-"so absurdly simple that an explanation is superfluous; and yet it may serve to define the limits of observation and of deduction.
The earth is of this peculiar reddish tint which is found, as far as I know, nowhere else in the neighbourhood.
Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat opposite to you all morning. I see also in your open desk there that you have a sheet of stamps and a thick bundle of post-cards.
What could you go into the post-office for, then, but to send a wire? Eliminate all other factors, and the one which remains must be the truth.
"In this case it certainly is so," I replied, after a little thought. "The thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest.
"On the contrary," he answered, "it would prevent me from taking a second dose of cocaine. I should be delighted to look into any problem which you might submit to me."
I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any object in daily use without leaving the impress of his individuality upon it in such a way that a trained observer might read it.
Now, I have here a watch which has recently come into my possession. Would you have the kindness to let me have an opinion upon the character or habits of the late owner?
He balanced the watch in his hand, gazed hard at the dial, opened the back, and examined the works, first with his naked eyes and then with a powerful convex lens.
I could hardly keep from smiling at his crestfallen face when he finally snapped the case to and handed it back.
"There are hardly any data," he remarked. "The watch has been recently cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts."
"You are right," I answered. "It was cleaned before being sent to me." In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a most lame and impotent excuse to cover his failure.
"Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren," he observed, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-lustre eyes.
Subject to your correction, I should judge that the watch belonged to your elder brother, who inherited it from your father.
Quite so. The W. suggests your own name. The date of the watch is nearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as the watch: so it was made for the last generation.
Jewelry usually descends to the eldest son, and he is most likely to have the same name as the father.
Your father has, if I remember right, been dead many years. It has, therefore, been in the hands of your eldest brother.
I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room with considerable bitterness in my heart.
"This is unworthy of you, Holmes," I said. "I could not have believed that you would have descended to this.
You have made inquires into the history of my unhappy brother, and you now pretend to deduce this knowledge in some fanciful way.
You cannot expect me to believe that you have read all this from his old watch! It is unkind, and, to speak plainly, has a touch of charlatanism in it.
"My dear doctor," said he, kindly, "pray accept my apologies. Viewing the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten how personal and painful a thing it might be to you.
Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get these facts? They are absolutely correct in every particular.
Ah, that is good luck. I could only say what was the balance of probability. I did not at all expect to be so accurate.
Surely it is no great feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-guinea watch so cavalierly must be a careless man.
Neither is it a very far-fetched inference that a man who inherits one article of such value is pretty well provided for in other respects.
It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take a watch, to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-point upon the inside of the case.
It is more handy than a label, as there is no risk of the number being lost or transposed. There are no less than four such numbers visible to my lens on the inside of this case.
Inference,-that your brother was often at low water. Secondary inference,-that he had occasional bursts of prosperity, or he could not have redeemed the pledge.
Finally, I ask you to look at the inner plate, which contains the key-hole. Look at the thousands of scratches all round the hole,-marks where the key has slipped.
What sober man's key could have scored those grooves? But you will never see a drunkard's watch without them.
He winds it at night, and he leaves these traces of his unsteady hand. Where is the mystery in all this?
"It is as clear as daylight," I answered. "I regret the injustice which I did you. I should have had more faith in your marvellous faculty.
None. Hence the cocaine. I cannot live without brain-work. What else is there to live for? Stand at the window here.
Was ever such a dreary, dismal, unprofitable world? See how the yellow fog swirls down the street and drifts across the dun-coloured houses.
What could be more hopelessly prosaic and material? What is the use of having powers, doctor, when one has no field upon which to exert them?
Crime is commonplace, existence is commonplace, and no qualities save those which are commonplace have any function upon earth.
I had opened my mouth to reply to this tirade, when with a crisp knock our landlady entered, bearing a card upon the brass salver.
"Miss Mary Morstan," he read. "Hum! I have no recollection of the name. Ask the young lady to step up, Mrs. Hudson.
Miss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outward composure of manner. She was a blonde young lady, small, dainty, well gloved, and dressed in the most perfect taste.
There was, however, a plainness and simplicity about her costume which bore with it a suggestion of limited means.
The dress was a sombre greyish beige, untrimmed and unbraided, and she wore a small turban of the same dull hue, relieved only by a suspicion of white feather in the side.
Her face had neither regularity of feature nor beauty of complexion, but her expression was sweet and amiable, and her large blue eyes were singularly spiritual and sympathetic.
In an experience of women which extends over many nations and three separate continents, I have never looked upon a face which gave a clearer promise of a refined and sensitive nature.
I could not but observe that as she took the seat which Sherlock Holmes placed for her, her lip trembled, her hand quivered, and she showed every sign of intense inward agitation.
"I have come to you, Mr. Holmes," she said, "because you once enabled my employer, Mrs. Cecil Forrester, to unravel a little domestic complication.
"Mrs. Cecil Forrester," he repeated thoughtfully. "I believe that I was of some slight service to her.
She did not think so. But at least you cannot say the same of mine. I can hardly imagine anything more strange, more utterly inexplicable, than the situation in which I find myself.
Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. He leaned forward in his chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon his clear-cut, hawklike features.
I felt that my position was an embarrassing one. "You will, I am sure, excuse me," I said, rising from my chair.
To my surprise, the young lady held up her gloved hand to detain me. "If your friend," she said, "would be good enough to stop, he might be of inestimable service to me."
"Briefly," she continued, "the facts are these. My father was an officer in an Indian regiment who sent me home when I was quite a child.
My mother was dead, and I had no relative in England. I was placed, however, in a comfortable boarding establishment at Edinburgh, and there I remained until I was seventeen years of age.
In the year 1878 my father, who was senior captain of his regiment, obtained twelve months' leave and came home.
He telegraphed to me from London that he had arrived all safe, and directed me to come down at once, giving the Langham Hotel as his address.
I waited all day without news of him. That night, on the advice of the manager of the hotel, I communicated with the police, and next morning we advertised in all the papers.
Our inquiries led to no result; and from that day to this no word has ever been heard of my unfortunate father.
He came home with his heart full of hope, to find some peace, some comfort, and instead-" She put her hand to her throat, and a choking sob cut short the sentence.
Remained at the hotel. There was nothing in it to suggest a clue,-some clothes, some books, and a considerable number of curiosities from the Andaman Islands.
Only one that we know of,-Major Sholto, of his own regiment, the 34th Bombay Infantry. The major had retired some little time before, and lived at Upper Norwood.
We communicated with him, of course, but he did not even know that his brother officer was in England.
There was no name or address appended. I had at that time just entered the family of Mrs. Cecil Forrester in the capacity of governess.
No word of writing was enclosed. Since then every year upon the same date there has always appeared a similar box, containing a similar pearl, without any clue as to the sender.
They have been pronounced by an expert to be of a rare variety and of considerable value. You can see for yourselves that they are very handsome.
Yes, and no later than to-day. That is why I have come to you. This morning I received this letter, which you will perhaps read for yourself.
"Thank you," said Holmes. "The envelope too, please. Postmark, London, S.W. Date, July 7. Hum! Man's thumb-mark on corner,-probably postman.
Best quality paper. Envelopes at sixpence a packet. Particular man in his stationery. No address. 'Be at the third pillar from the left outside the Lyceum Theatre to-night at seven o'clock.
If you are distrustful, bring two friends. You are a wronged woman, and shall have justice. Do not bring police.
If you do, all will be in vain. Your unknown friend.' Well, really, this is a very pretty little mystery.
Then we shall most certainly go. You and I and-yes, why, Dr. Watson is the very man. Your correspondent says two friends.
"You are both very kind," she answered. "I have led a retired life, and have no friends whom I could appeal to.
"You must not be later," said Holmes. "There is one other point, however. Is this handwriting the same as that upon the pearl-box addresses?"
"You are certainly a model client. You have the correct intuition. Let us see, now." He spread out the papers upon the table, and gave little darting glances from one to the other.
"They are disguised hands, except the letter," he said, presently, "but there can be no question as to the authorship.
See how the irrepressible Greek e will break out, and see the twirl of the final _s_. They are undoubtedly by the same person.
I should not like to suggest false hopes, Miss Morstan, but is there any resemblance between this hand and that of your father?
I expected to hear you say so. We shall look out for you, then, at six. Pray allow me to keep the papers.
"_Au revoir_," said our visitor, and, with a bright, kindly glance from one to the other of us, she replaced her pearl-box in her bosom and hurried away.
Standing at the window, I watched her walking briskly down the street, until the grey turban and white feather were but a speck in the sombre crowd.
He had lit his pipe again, and was leaning back with drooping eyelids. "Is she?" he said, languidly. "I did not observe."
"You really are an automaton,-a calculating-machine!" I cried. "There is something positively inhuman in you at times."
He smiled gently. "It is of the first importance," he said, "not to allow your judgment to be biased by personal qualities.
A client is to me a mere unit,-a factor in a problem. The emotional qualities are antagonistic to clear reasoning.
I assure you that the most winning woman I ever knew was hanged for poisoning three little children for their insurance-money, and the most repellant man of my acquaintance is a philanthropist who has spent nearly a quarter of a million upon the London poor.
I never make exceptions. An exception disproves the rule. Have you ever had occasion to study character in handwriting?
Holmes shook his head. "Look at his long letters," he said. "They hardly rise above the common herd. That d might be an _a_, and that l an _e_.
Men of character always differentiate their long letters, however illegibly they may write. There is vacillation in his _k_'s and self-esteem in his capitals.
I am going out now. I have some few references to make. Let me recommend this book,-one of the most remarkable ever penned.
I sat in the window with the volume in my hand, but my thoughts were far from the daring speculations of the writer.
My mind ran upon our late visitor,-her smiles, the deep rich tones of her voice, the strange mystery which overhung her life.
If she were seventeen at the time of her father's disappearance she must be seven-and-twenty now,-a sweet age, when youth has lost its self-consciousness and become a little sobered by experience.
So I sat and mused, until such dangerous thoughts came into my head that I hurried away to my desk and plunged furiously into the latest treatise upon pathology.
What was I, an army surgeon with a weak leg and a weaker banking-account, that I should dare to think of such things?
She was a unit, a factor,-nothing more. If my future were black, it was better surely to face it like a man than to attempt to brighten it by mere will-o'-the-wisps of the imagination.
It was half-past five before Holmes returned. He was bright, eager, and in excellent spirits,-a mood which in his case alternated with fits of the blackest depression.
"There is no great mystery in this matter," he said, taking the cup of tea which I had poured out for him.
Well, that would be too much to say. I have discovered a suggestive fact, that is all. It is, however, very suggestive.
The details are still to be added. I have just found, on consulting the back files of the _Times_, that Major Sholto, of Upper Norwood, late of the 34th Bombay Infantry, died upon the 28th of April, 1882.
No? You surprise me. Look at it in this way, then. Captain Morstan disappears. The only person in London whom he could have visited is Major Sholto.
But what a strange compensation! And how strangely made! Why, too, should he write a letter now, rather than six years ago?
Again, the letter speaks of giving her justice. What justice can she have? It is too much to suppose that her father is still alive.
"There are difficulties; there are certainly difficulties," said Sherlock Holmes, pensively. "But our expedition of to-night will solve them all.
Ah, here is a four-wheeler, and Miss Morstan is inside. Are you all ready? Then we had better go down, for it is a little past the hour.
I picked up my hat and my heaviest stick, but I observed that Holmes took his revolver from his drawer and slipped it into his pocket.
Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face was composed, but pale. She must have been more than woman if she did not feel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we were embarking, yet her self-control was perfect, and she readily answered the few additional questions which Sherlock Holmes put to her.
"Major Sholto was a very particular friend of papa's," she said. "His letters were full of allusions to the major.
He and papa were in command of the troops at the Andaman Islands, so they were thrown a great deal together.
Holmes unfolded the paper carefully and smoothed it out upon his knee. He then very methodically examined it all over with his double lens.
"It is paper of native Indian manufacture," he remarked. "It has at some time been pinned to a board.
The diagram upon it appears to be a plan of part of a large building with numerous halls, corridors, and passages.
At one point is a small cross done in red ink, and above it is '3.37 from left,' in faded pencil-writing.
In the left-hand corner is a curious hieroglyphic like four crosses in a line with their arms touching.
Beside it is written, in very rough and coarse characters, 'The sign of the four,-Jonathan Small, Mahomet Singh, Abdullah Khan, Dost Akbar.'
No, I confess that I do not see how this bears upon the matter. Yet it is evidently a document of importance.
Preserve it carefully, then, Miss Morstan, for it may prove to be of use to us. I begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to be much deeper and more subtle than I at first supposed.
I must reconsider my ideas." He leaned back in the cab, and I could see by his drawn brow and his vacant eye that he was thinking intently.
Miss Morstan and I chatted in an undertone about our present expedition and its possible outcome, but our companion maintained his impenetrable reserve until the end of our journey.
It was a September evening, and not yet seven o'clock, but the day had been a dreary one, and a dense drizzly fog lay low upon the great city.
Mud-coloured clouds drooped sadly over the muddy streets. Down the Strand the lamps were but misty splotches of diffused light which threw a feeble circular glimmer upon the slimy pavement.
The yellow glare from the shop-windows streamed out into the steamy, vaporous air, and threw a murky, shifting radiance across the crowded thoroughfare.
There was, to my mind, something eerie and ghost-like in the endless procession of faces which flitted across these narrow bars of light,-sad faces and glad, haggard and merry.
Like all human kind, they flitted from the gloom into the light, and so back into the gloom once more.
I am not subject to impressions, but the dull, heavy evening, with the strange business upon which we were engaged, combined to make me nervous and depressed.
I could see from Miss Morstan's manner that she was suffering from the same feeling. Holmes alone could rise superior to petty influences.
He held his open note-book upon his knee, and from time to time he jotted down figures and memoranda in the light of his pocket-lantern.
We had hardly reached the third pillar, which was our rendezvous, before a small, dark, brisk man in the dress of a coachman accosted us.
He bent a pair of wonderfully penetrating and questioning eyes upon us. "You will excuse me, miss," he said with a certain dogged manner, "but I was to ask you to give me your word that neither of your companions is a police-officer."
He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across a four-wheeler and opened the door. The man who had addressed us mounted to the box, while we took our places inside.
We had hardly done so before the driver whipped up his horse, and we plunged away at a furious pace through the foggy streets.
To this day she declares that I told her one moving anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead of night, and how I fired a double-barrelled tiger cub at it.
Sherlock Holmes was never at fault, however, and he muttered the names as the cab rattled through squares and in and out by tortuous by-streets.
"Rochester Row," said he. "Now Vincent Square. Now we come out on the Vauxhall Bridge Road. We are making for the Surrey side, apparently.
We did indeed get a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames with the lamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed on, and was soon involved in a labyrinth of streets upon the other side.
"Wordsworth Road," said my companion. "Priory Road. Lark Hall Lane. Stockwell Place. Robert Street. Cold Harbor Lane.
We had, indeed, reached a questionable and forbidding neighbourhood. Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarse glare and tawdry brilliancy of public houses at the corner.
On our knocking, however, the door was instantly thrown open by a Hindoo servant clad in a yellow turban, white loose-fitting clothes, and a yellow sash.
There was something strangely incongruous in this Oriental figure framed in the commonplace doorway of a third-rate suburban dwelling-house.
"The Sahib awaits you," said he, and even as he spoke there came a high piping voice from some inner room.
We followed the Indian down a sordid and common passage, ill-lit and worse furnished, until he came to a door upon the right, which he threw open.
He writhed his hands together as he stood, and his features were in a perpetual jerk, now smiling, now scowling, but never for an instant in repose.
Nature had given him a pendulous lip, and a too visible line of yellow and irregular teeth, which he strove feebly to conceal by constantly passing his hand over the lower part of his face.
In spite of his obtrusive baldness, he gave the impression of youth. In point of fact he had just turned his thirtieth year.
"Your servant, Miss Morstan," he kept repeating, in a thin, high voice. "Your servant, gentlemen. Pray step into my little sanctum.
A small place, miss, but furnished to my own liking. An oasis of art in the howling desert of South London.
We were all astonished by the appearance of the apartment into which he invited us. In that sorry house it looked as out of place as a diamond of the first water in a setting of brass.
The richest and glossiest of curtains and tapestries draped the walls, looped back here and there to expose some richly-mounted painting or Oriental vase.
The carpet was of amber-and-black, so soft and so thick that the foot sank pleasantly into it, as into a bed of moss.
Two great tiger-skins thrown athwart it increased the suggestion of Eastern luxury, as did a huge hookah which stood upon a mat in the corner.
A lamp in the fashion of a silver dove was hung from an almost invisible golden wire in the centre of the room.
"Mr. Thaddeus Sholto," said the little man, still jerking and smiling. "That is my name. You are Miss Morstan, of course.
"A doctor, eh?" cried he, much excited. "Have you your stethoscope? Might I ask you-would you have the kindness?
I have grave doubts as to my mitral valve, if you would be so very good. The aortic I may rely upon, but I should value your opinion upon the mitral.
I listened to his heart, as requested, but was unable to find anything amiss, save indeed that he was in an ecstasy of fear, for he shivered from head to foot.
"You will excuse my anxiety, Miss Morstan," he remarked, airily. "I am a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to that valve.
I am delighted to hear that they are unwarranted. Had your father, Miss Morstan, refrained from throwing a strain upon his heart, he might have been alive now.
I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at this callous and off-hand reference to so delicate a matter.
Miss Morstan sat down, and her face grew white to the lips. "I knew in my heart that he was dead," said she.
"I can give you every information," said he, "and, what is more, I can do you justice; and I will, too, whatever Brother Bartholomew may say.
I am so glad to have your friends here, not only as an escort to you, but also as witnesses to what I am about to do and say.
The three of us can show a bold front to Brother Bartholomew. But let us have no outsiders,-no police or officials.
We can settle everything satisfactorily among ourselves, without any interference. Nothing would annoy Brother Bartholomew more than any publicity.
"That is well! That is well!" said he. "May I offer you a glass of Chianti, Miss Morstan? Or of Tokay?
I keep no other wines. Shall I open a flask? No? Well, then, I trust that you have no objection to tobacco-smoke, to the mild balsamic odour of the Eastern tobacco.
I am a little nervous, and I find my hookah an invaluable sedative." He applied a taper to the great bowl, and the smoke bubbled merrily through the rose-water.
We sat all three in a semi-circle, with our heads advanced, and our chins upon our hands, while the strange, jerky little fellow, with his high, shining head, puffed uneasily in the centre.
"When I first determined to make this communication to you," said he, "I might have given you my address, but I feared that you might disregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you.
I took the liberty, therefore, of making an appointment in such a way that my man Williams might be able to see you first.
I have complete confidence in his discretion, and he had orders, if he were dissatisfied, to proceed no further in the matter.
I have a natural shrinking from all forms of rough materialism. I seldom come in contact with the rough crowd.
I live, as you see, with some little atmosphere of elegance around me. I may call myself a patron of the arts.
It is my weakness. The landscape is a genuine Corot, and, though a connoisseur might perhaps throw a doubt upon that Salvator Rosa, there cannot be the least question about the Bouguereau.
"You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto," said Miss Morstan, "but I am here at your request to learn something which you desire to tell me.
"At the best it must take some time," he answered; "for we shall certainly have to go to Norwood and see Brother Bartholomew.
We shall all go and try if we can get the better of Brother Bartholomew. He is very angry with me for taking the course which has seemed right to me.
I had quite high words with him last night. You cannot imagine what a terrible fellow he is when he is angry.
We searched the garden that night, but found no sign of the intruder, save that just under the window a single footmark was visible in the flower-bed.
But for that one trace, we might have thought that our imaginations had conjured up that wild, fierce face.
We soon, however, had another and a more striking proof that there were secret agencies at work all round us.
What the phrase meant, or who our secret visitor may have been, we never knew. As far as we can judge, none of my father's property had been actually stolen, though everything had been turned out.
My brother and I naturally associated this peculiar incident with the fear which haunted my father during his life; but it is still a complete mystery to us.
The little man stopped to relight his hookah and puffed thoughtfully for a few moments. We had all sat absorbed, listening to his extraordinary narrative.
At the short account of her father's death Miss Morstan had turned deadly white, and for a moment I feared that she was about to faint.
She rallied however, on drinking a glass of water which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe upon the side-table.
Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair with an abstracted expression and the lids drawn low over his glittering eyes.
As I glanced at him I could not but think how on that very day he had complained bitterly of the commonplaceness of life.
Here at least was a problem which would tax his sagacity to the utmost. Mr. Thaddeus Sholto looked from one to the other of us with an obvious pride at the effect which his story had produced, and then continued between the puffs of his overgrown pipe.
"My brother and I," said he, "were, as you may imagine, much excited as to the treasure which my father had spoken of.
For weeks and for months we dug and delved in every part of the garden, without discovering its whereabouts.
It was maddening to think that the hiding-place was on his very lips at the moment that he died. We could judge the splendour of the missing riches by the chaplet which he had taken out.
He thought, too, that if we parted with the chaplet it might give rise to gossip and finally bring us into trouble.
It was all that I could do to persuade him to let me find out Miss Morstan's address and send her a detached pearl at fixed intervals, so that at least she might never feel destitute.
The little man waved his hand deprecatingly. "We were your trustees," he said. "That was the view which I took of it, though Brother Bartholomew could not altogether see it in that light.
We had plenty of money ourselves. I desired no more. Besides, it would have been such bad taste to have treated a young lady in so scurvy a fashion.
Yesterday, however, I learn that an event of extreme importance has occurred. The treasure has been discovered.
I instantly communicated with Miss Morstan, and it only remains for us to drive out to Norwood and demand our share.
I explained my views last night to Brother Bartholomew: so we shall be expected, if not welcome, visitors.
Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurious settee. We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the new development which the mysterious business had taken.
"You have done well, sir, from first to last," said he. "It is possible that we may be able to make you some small return by throwing some light upon that which is still dark to you.
But, as Miss Morstan remarked just now, it is late, and we had best put the matter through without delay.
Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of his hookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befrogged topcoat with Astrakhan collar and cuffs.
"My health is somewhat fragile," he remarked, as he led the way down the passage. "I am compelled to be a valetudinarian."
Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our programme was evidently prearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid pace.
In the centre stood the treasure-chest, resting upon two rafters. He lowered it through the hole, and there it lies.
At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one another open-eyed. Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would change from a needy governess to the richest heiress in England.
Surely it was the place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news; yet I am ashamed to say that selfishness took me by the soul, and that my heart turned as heavy as lead within me.
I stammered out some few halting words of congratulation, and then sat downcast, with my head drooped, deaf to the babble of our new acquaintance.
However that may be, I was certainly relieved when our cab pulled up with a jerk and the coachman sprang down to open the door.
It was nearly eleven o'clock when we reached this final stage of our night's adventures. We had left the damp fog of the great city behind us, and the night was fairly fine.
A warm wind blew from the westward, and heavy clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half a moon peeping occasionally through the rifts.
It was clear enough to see for some distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of the side-lamps from the carriage to give us a better light upon our way.
Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with a very high stone wall topped with broken glass.
A single narrow iron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance. On this our guide knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat.
There was a grumbling sound and a clanking and jarring of keys. The door swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man stood in the opening, with the yellow light of the lantern shining upon his protruded face and twinkling distrustful eyes.
He ain't been out o' his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have no orders. You know very well that I must stick to regulations.
This was an unexpected obstacle. Thaddeus Sholto looked about him in a perplexed and helpless manner.
"This is too bad of you, McMurdo!" he said. "If I guarantee them, that is enough for you. There is the young lady, too.
"Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus," said the porter, inexorably. "Folk may be friends o' yours, and yet no friends o' the master's.
"Oh, yes you do, McMurdo," cried Sherlock Holmes, genially. "I don't think you can have forgotten me.
Don't you remember the amateur who fought three rounds with you at Alison's rooms on the night of your benefit four years back?
Ah, you're one that has wasted your gifts, you have! You might have aimed high, if you had joined the fancy.
"You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of the scientific professions open to me," said Holmes, laughing.
"In you come, sir, in you come,-you and your friends," he answered. "Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict.
Inside, a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clump of a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow save where a moonbeam struck one corner and glimmered in a garret window.
The vast size of the building, with its gloom and its deathly silence, struck a chill to the heart. Even Thaddeus Sholto seemed ill at ease, and the lantern quivered and rattled in his hand.
"I cannot understand it," he said. "There must be some mistake. I distinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet there is no light in his window.
Yes; he has followed my father's custom. He was the favourite son, you know, and I sometimes think that my father may have told him more than he ever told me.
That is Bartholomew's window up there where the moonshine strikes. It is quite bright, but there is no light from within, I think.
Ah, that is the housekeeper's room. That is where old Mrs. Bernstone sits. She can tell us all about it.
But perhaps you would not mind waiting here for a minute or two, for if we all go in together and she has no word of our coming she may be alarmed.
He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of light flickered and wavered all round us.
Miss Morstan seized my wrist, and we all stood with thumping hearts, straining our ears. From the great black house there sounded through the silent night the saddest and most pitiful of sounds,-the shrill, broken whimpering of a frightened woman.
"It is Mrs. Bernstone," said Sholto. "She is the only woman in the house. Wait here. I shall be back in a moment."
He hurried for the door, and knocked in his peculiar way. We could see a tall old woman admit him, and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him.
"Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come! I am so glad you have come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!" We heard her reiterated rejoicings until the door was closed and her voice died away into a muffled monotone.
Our guide had left us the lantern. Holmes swung it slowly round, and peered keenly at the house, and at the great rubbish-heaps which cumbered the grounds.
So we stood hand in hand, like two children, and there was peace in our hearts for all the dark things that surrounded us.
It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose in it. I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hill near Ballarat, where the prospectors had been at work.
"And from the same cause," said Holmes. "These are the traces of the treasure-seekers. You must remember that they were six years looking for it.
At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholto came running out, with his hands thrown forward and terror in his eyes.
"There is something amiss with Bartholomew!" he cried. "I am frightened! My nerves cannot stand it." He was, indeed, half blubbering with fear, and his twitching feeble face peeping out from the great Astrakhan collar had the helpless appealing expression of a terrified child.
We all followed him into the housekeeper's room, which stood upon the left-hand side of the passage. The old woman was pacing up and down with a scared look and restless picking fingers, but the sight of Miss Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her.
"God bless your sweet calm face!" she cried, with an hysterical sob. "It does me good to see you. Oh, but I have been sorely tried this day!"
Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few words of kindly womanly comfort which brought the colour back into the other's bloodless cheeks.
You must go up, Mr. Thaddeus,-you must go up and look for yourself. I have seen Mr. Bartholomew Sholto in joy and in sorrow for ten long years, but I never saw him with such a face on him as that.
Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto's teeth were chattering in his head.
So shaken was he that I had to pass my hand under his arm as we went up the stairs, for his knees were trembling under him.
He walked slowly from step to step, holding the lamp, and shooting keen glances to right and left. Miss Morstan had remained behind with the frightened housekeeper.
The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of some length, with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right of it and three doors upon the left.
Holmes advanced along it in the same slow and methodical way, while we kept close at his heels, with our long black shadows streaming backwards down the corridor.
The third door was that which we were seeking. Holmes knocked without receiving any answer, and then tried to turn the handle and force it open.
It was locked on the inside, however, and by a broad and powerful bolt, as we could see when we set our lamp up against it.
The key being turned, however, the hole was not entirely closed. Sherlock Holmes bent down to it, and instantly rose again with a sharp intaking of the breath.
"There is something devilish in this, Watson," said he, more moved than I had ever before seen him. "What do you make of it?"
I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror. Moonlight was streaming into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shifty radiance.
Looking straight at me, and suspended, as it were, in the air, for all beneath was in shadow, there hung a face,-the very face of our companion Thaddeus.
There was the same high, shining head, the same circular bristle of red hair, the same bloodless countenance.
The features were set, however, in a horrible smile, a fixed and unnatural grin, which in that still and moonlit room was more jarring to the nerves than any scowl or contortion.
So like was the face to that of our little friend that I looked round at him to make sure that he was indeed with us.
"The door must come down," he answered, and, springing against it, he put all his weight upon the lock.
It creaked and groaned, but did not yield. Together we flung ourselves upon it once more, and this time it gave way with a sudden snap, and we found ourselves within Bartholomew Sholto's chamber.
A set of steps stood at one side of the room, in the midst of a litter of lath and plaster, and above them there was an opening in the ceiling large enough for a man to pass through.
By the table, in a wooden arm-chair, the master of the house was seated all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoulder, and that ghastly, inscrutable smile upon his face.
He was stiff and cold, and had clearly been dead many hours. It seemed to me that not only his features but all his limbs were twisted and turned in the most fantastic fashion.
By his hand upon the table there lay a peculiar instrument,-a brown, close-grained stick, with a stone head like a hammer, rudely lashed on with coarse twine.
Beside it was a torn sheet of note-paper with some words scrawled upon it. Holmes glanced at it, and then handed it to me.
"It means murder," said he, stooping over the dead man. "Ah, I expected it. Look here!" He pointed to what looked like a long, dark thorn stuck in the skin just above the ear.
I took it up between my finger and thumb. It came away from the skin so readily that hardly any mark was left behind.
"On the contrary," he answered, "it clears every instant. I only require a few missing links to have an entirely connected case."
We had almost forgotten our companion's presence since we entered the chamber. He was still standing in the doorway, the very picture of terror, wringing his hands and moaning to himself.
"The treasure is gone!" he said. "They have robbed him of the treasure! There is the hole through which we lowered it.
I helped him to do it! I was the last person who saw him! I left him here last night, and I heard him lock the door as I came downstairs.
It was ten o'clock. And now he is dead, and the police will be called in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it.
Oh, yes, I am sure I shall. But you don't think so, gentlemen? Surely you don't think that it was I? Is it likely that I would have brought you here if it were I?
Oh, dear! oh, dear! I know that I shall go mad!" He jerked his arms and stamped his feet in a kind of convulsive frenzy.
"You have no reason for fear, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes, kindly, putting his hand upon his shoulder. "Take my advice, and drive down to the station to report this matter to the police.
The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard him stumbling down the stairs in the dark.
"Now, Watson," said Holmes, rubbing his hands, "we have half an hour to ourselves. Let us make good use of it.
My case is, as I have told you, almost complete; but we must not err on the side of over-confidence. Simple as the case seems now, there may be something deeper underlying it.
"Surely," said he, with something of the air of a clinical professor expounding to his class. "Just sit in the corner there, that your footprints may not complicate matters.
Now to work! In the first place, how did these folk come, and how did they go? The door has not been opened since last night.
How of the window?" He carried the lamp across to it, muttering his observations aloud the while, but addressing them to himself rather than to me.
Window is snibbed on the inner side. Framework is solid. No hinges at the side. Let us open it. No water-pipe near.
Roof quite out of reach. Yet a man has mounted by the window. It rained a little last night. Here is the print of a foot in mould upon the sill.
And here is a circular muddy mark, and here again upon the floor, and here again by the table. See here, Watson!
It is something much more valuable to us. It is the impression of a wooden stump. You see here on the sill is the boot-mark, a heavy boot with the broad metal heel, and beside it is the mark of the timber-toe.
Quite so. But there has been some one else,-a very able and efficient ally. Could you scale that wall, doctor?
I looked out of the open window. The moon still shone brightly on that angle of the house. We were a good sixty feet from the ground, and, look where I would, I could see no foothold, nor as much as a crevice in the brick-work.
Without aid it is so. But suppose you had a friend up here who lowered you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, securing one end of it to this great hook in the wall.
As a minor point it may be noted," he continued, fingering the rope, "that our wooden-legged friend, though a fair climber, was not a professional sailor.
His hands were far from horny. My lens discloses more than one blood-mark, especially towards the end of the rope, from which I gather that he slipped down with such velocity that he took the skin off his hand.
"This is all very well," said I, "but the thing becomes more unintelligible than ever. How about this mysterious ally?
"Yes, the ally!" repeated Holmes, pensively. "There are features of interest about this ally. He lifts the case from the regions of the commonplace.
I fancy that this ally breaks fresh ground in the annals of crime in this country,-though parallel cases suggest themselves from India, and, if my memory serves me, from Senegambia.
"How came he, then?" I reiterated. "The door is locked, the window is inaccessible. Was it through the chimney?"
"You will not apply my precept," he said, shaking his head. "How often have I said to you that when you have eliminated the impossible whatever remains, _however improbable_, must be the truth?
We know that he did not come through the door, the window, or the chimney. We also know that he could not have been concealed in the room, as there is no concealment possible.
Of course he did. He must have done so. If you will have the kindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researches to the room above,-the secret room in which the treasure was found.
He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, he swung himself up into the garret. Then, lying on his face, he reached down for the lamp and held it while I followed him.
The roof ran up to an apex, and was evidently the inner shell of the true roof of the house. There was no furniture of any sort, and the accumulated dust of years lay thick upon the floor.
"Here you are, you see," said Sherlock Holmes, putting his hand against the sloping wall. "This is a trap-door which leads out on to the roof.
I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, sloping at a gentle angle. This, then, is the way by which Number One entered.
He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for the second time that night a startled, surprised look come over his face.
For myself, as I followed his gaze my skin was cold under my clothes. The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a naked foot,-clear, well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half the size of those of an ordinary man.
He had recovered his self-possession in an instant. "I was staggered for the moment," he said, "but the thing is quite natural.
My memory failed me, or I should have been able to foretell it. There is nothing more to be learned here.
"What is your theory, then, as to those footmarks?" I asked, eagerly, when we had regained the lower room once more.
"My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself," said he, with a touch of impatience. "You know my methods.
"It will be clear enough to you soon," he said, in an off-hand way. "I think that there is nothing else of importance here, but I will look."
As he hunted about, he kept muttering to himself, and finally he broke out into a loud crow of delight.
"We are certainly in luck," said he. "We ought to have very little trouble now. Number One has had the misfortune to tread in the creosote.
You can see the outline of the edge of his small foot here at the side of this evil-smelling mess. The carboy has been cracked, You see, and the stuff has leaked out.
"Why, we have got him, that's all," said he. "I know a dog that would follow that scent to the world's end.
If a pack can track a trailed herring across a shire, how far can a specially-trained hound follow so pungent a smell as this?
It sounds like a sum in the rule of three. The answer should give us the-But halloa! here are the accredited representatives of the law.
Heavy steps and the clamour of loud voices were audible from below, and the hall door shut with a loud crash.
"Before they come," said Holmes, "just put your hand here on this poor fellow's arm, and here on his leg.
Quite so. They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceeding the usual _rigor mortis_. Coupled with this distortion of the face, this Hippocratic smile, or '_risus sardonicus_,' as the old writers called it, what conclusion would it suggest to your mind?
"Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid," I answered,-"some strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus."
That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawn muscles of the face. On getting into the room I at once looked for the means by which the poison had entered the system.
I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern. It was long, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the point as though some gummy substance had dried upon it.
With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference. But here are the regulars; so the auxiliary forces may beat a retreat.
As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly on the passage, and a very stout, portly man in a grey suit strode heavily into the room.
He was red-faced, burly and plethoric, with a pair of very small twinkling eyes which looked keenly out from between swollen and puffy pouches.
"Here's a business!" he cried, in a muffled, husky voice. "Here's a pretty business! But who are all these?
"Why, of course I do!" he wheezed. "It's Mr. Sherlock Holmes, the theorist. Remember you! I'll never forget how you lectured us all on causes and inferences and effects in the Bishopgate jewel case.
It's true you set us on the right track; but you'll own now that it was more by good luck than good guidance.
Oh, come, now, come! Never be ashamed to own up. But what is all this? Bad business! Bad business! Stern facts here,-no room for theories.
How lucky that I happened to be out at Norwood over another case! I was at the station when the message arrived.
No, no. Still, we can't deny that you hit the nail on the head sometimes. Dear me! Door locked, I understand.
Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to do with the matter. That's common sense.
Man might have died in a fit; but then the jewels are missing. Ha! I have a theory. These flashes come upon me at times.-Just step outside, sergeant, and you, Mr. Sholto.
Your friend can remain.-What do you think of this, Holmes? Sholto was, on his own confession, with his brother last night.
Hum! There's a flaw there. Let us apply common sense to the matter. This Thaddeus Sholto was with his brother; there was a quarrel; so much we know.
The brother is dead and the jewels are gone. So much also we know. No one saw the brother from the time Thaddeus left him.
His bed had not been slept in. Thaddeus is evidently in a most disturbed state of mind. His appearance is-well, not attractive.
"Confirms it in every respect," said the fat detective, pompously. "House is full of Indian curiosities.
Thaddeus brought this up, and if this splinter be poisonous Thaddeus may as well have made murderous use of it as any other man.
The card is some hocus-pocus,-a blind, as like as not. The only question is, how did he depart? Ah, of course, here is a hole in the roof.
With great activity, considering his bulk, he sprang up the steps and squeezed through into the garret, and immediately afterwards we heard his exulting voice proclaiming that he had found the trap-door.
"He can find something," remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "He has occasional glimmerings of reason.
"You see!" said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again. "Facts are better than mere theories, after all.
My view of the case is confirmed. There is a trap-door communicating with the roof, and it is partly open.
"Oh, indeed! You did notice it, then?" He seemed a little crestfallen at the discovery. "Well, whoever noticed it, it shows how our gentleman got away.
Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.-Mr. Sholto, it is my duty to inform you that anything which you may say will be used against you.
"There, now! Didn't I tell you!" cried the poor little man, throwing out his hands, and looking from one to the other of us.
"Don't trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes. "I think that I can engage to clear you of the charge."
"Don't promise too much, Mr. Theorist,-don't promise too much!" snapped the detective. "You may find it a harder matter than you think."
Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a free present of the name and description of one of the two people who were in this room last night.
His name, I have every reason to believe, is Jonathan Small. He is a poorly-educated man, small, active, with his right leg off, and wearing a wooden stump which is worn away upon the inner side.
His left boot has a coarse, square-toed sole, with an iron band round the heel. He is a middle-aged man, much sunburned, and has been a convict.
These few indications may be of some assistance to you, coupled with the fact that there is a good deal of skin missing from the palm of his hand.
"Ah! the other man-?" asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, but impressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the precision of the other's manner.
"Is a rather curious person," said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon his heel. "I hope before very long to be able to introduce you to the pair of them.-A word with you, Watson."
He led me out to the head of the stair. "This unexpected occurrence," he said, "has caused us rather to lose sight of the original purpose of our journey."
"I have just been thinking so," I answered. "It is not right that Miss Morstan should remain in this stricken house."
No. You must escort her home. She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester, in Lower Camberwell: so it is not very far.
"Your presence will be of great service to me," he answered. "We shall work the case out independently, and leave this fellow Jones to exult over any mare's-nest which he may choose to construct.
When you have dropped Miss Morstan I wish you to go on to No. 3, Pinchin Lane, down near the water's edge at Lambeth.
The third house on the right-hand side is a bird-stuffer's: Sherman is the name. You will see a weasel holding a young rabbit in the window.
Knock old Sherman up, and tell him, with my compliments, that I want Toby at once. You will bring Toby back in the cab with you.
Yes,-a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent. I would rather have Toby's help than that of the whole detective force of London.
"I shall bring him, then," said I. "It is one now. I ought to be back before three, if I can get a fresh horse."
"And I," said Holmes, "shall see what I can learn from Mrs. Bernstone, and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me, sleeps in the next garret.
In the cab, however, she first turned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping,-so sorely had she been tried by the adventures of the night.
She has told me since that she thought me cold and distant upon that journey. She little guessed the struggle within my breast, or the effort of self-restraint which held me back.
Yet there were two thoughts which sealed the words of affection upon my lips. She was weak and helpless, shaken in mind and nerve.
It was to take her at a disadvantage to obtrude love upon her at such a time. Worse still, she was rich.
If Holmes's researches were successful, she would be an heiress. Was it fair, was it honourable, that a half-pay surgeon should take such advantage of an intimacy which chance had brought about?
Might she not look upon me as a mere vulgar fortune-seeker? I could not bear to risk that such a thought should cross her mind.
She opened the door herself, a middle-aged, graceful woman, and it gave me joy to see how tenderly her arm stole round the other's waist and how motherly was the voice in which she greeted her.
She was clearly no mere paid dependant, but an honoured friend. I was introduced, and Mrs. Forrester earnestly begged me to step in and tell her our adventures.
I explained, however, the importance of my errand, and promised faithfully to call and report any progress which we might make with the case.
It was soothing to catch even that passing glimpse of a tranquil English home in the midst of the wild, dark business which had absorbed us.
And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker it grew. I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of events as I rattled on through the silent gas-lit streets.
There was the original problem: that at least was pretty clear now. The death of Captain Morstan, the sending of the pearls, the advertisement, the letter,-we had had light upon all those events.
They had only led us, however, to a deeper and far more tragic mystery. The Indian treasure, the curious plan found among Morstan's baggage, the strange scene at Major Sholto's death, the rediscovery of the treasure immediately followed by the murder of the discoverer, the very singular accompaniments to the crime, the footsteps, the remarkable weapons, the words upon the card, corresponding with those upon Captain Morstan's chart,-here was indeed a labyrinth in which a man less singularly endowed than my fellow-lodger might well despair of ever finding the clue.
Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in the lower quarter of Lambeth. I had to knock for some time at No.
"Go on, you drunken vagabone," said the face. "If you kick up any more row I'll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs upon you."
"Go on!" yelled the voice. "So help me gracious, I have a wiper in the bag, an' I'll drop it on your 'ead if you don't hook it."
"I won't be argued with!" shouted Mr. Sherman. "Now stand clear, for when I say 'three,' down goes the wiper."
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes-" I began, but the words had a most magical effect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a minute the door was unbarred and open.
Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean old man, with stooping shoulders, a stringy neck, and blue-tinted glasses.
"A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome," said he. "Step in, sir. Keep clear of the badger; for he bites.
Ah, naughty, naughty, would you take a nip at the gentleman?" This to a stoat which thrust its wicked head and red eyes between the bars of its cage.
Don't mind that, sir: it's only a slow-worm. It hain't got no fangs, so I gives it the run o' the room, for it keeps the beetles down.
You must not mind my bein' just a little short wi' you at first, for I'm guyed at by the children, and there's many a one just comes down this lane to knock me up.
"Toby lives at No. 7 on the left here." He moved slowly forward with his candle among the queer animal family which he had gathered round him.
In the uncertain, shadowy light I could see dimly that there were glancing, glimmering eyes peeping down at us from every cranny and corner.
Even the rafters above our heads were lined by solemn fowls, who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the other as our voices disturbed their slumbers.
Toby proved to be an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half spaniel and half lurcher, brown-and-white in colour, with a very clumsy waddling gait.
It had just struck three on the Palace clock when I found myself back once more at Pondicherry Lodge.
The ex-prize-fighter McMurdo had, I found, been arrested as an accessory, and both he and Mr. Sholto had been marched off to the station.
Two constables guarded the narrow gate, but they allowed me to pass with the dog on my mentioning the detective's name.
"Ah, you have him there!" said he. "Good dog, then! Athelney Jones has gone. We have had an immense display of energy since you left.
He has arrested not only friend Thaddeus, but the gatekeeper, the housekeeper, and the Indian servant.
We tied Toby to the hall table, and re-ascended the stairs. The room was as he had left it, save that a sheet had been draped over the central figure.
"Lend me your bull's-eye, sergeant," said my companion. "Now tie this bit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of me.
Thank you. Now I must kick off my boots and stockings.-Just you carry them down with you, Watson. I am going to do a little climbing.
And dip my handkerchief into the creasote. That will do. Now come up into the garret with me for a moment.
"I wish you particularly to notice these footmarks," he said. "Do you observe anything noteworthy about them?"
Not at all. Look here! This is the print of a right foot in the dust. Now I make one with my naked foot beside it.
Quite so. That is the point. Bear that in mind. Now, would you kindly step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of the wood-work?
That is where he put his foot in getting out. If you can trace him, I should think that Toby will have no difficulty.
By the time that I got out into the grounds Sherlock Holmes was on the roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawling very slowly along the ridge.
I lost sight of him behind a stack of chimneys, but he presently reappeared, and then vanished once more upon the opposite side.
Confound the fellow! It's a most break-neck place. I ought to be able to come down where he could climb up.
There was a scuffling of feet, and the lantern began to come steadily down the side of the wall. Then with a light spring he came on to the barrel, and from there to the earth.
"It was easy to follow him," he said, drawing on his stockings and boots. "Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in his hurry he had dropped this.
The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch woven out of coloured grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it.
In shape and size it was not unlike a cigarette-case. Inside were half a dozen spines of dark wood, sharp at one end and rounded at the other, like that which had struck Bartholomew Sholto.
"They are hellish things," said he. "Look out that you don't prick yourself. I'm delighted to have them, for the chances are that they are all he has.
There is the less fear of you or me finding one in our skin before long. I would sooner face a Martini bullet, myself.
Holmes then threw the handkerchief to a distance, fastened a stout cord to the mongrel's collar, and led him to the foot of the water-barrel.
The creature instantly broke into a succession of high, tremulous yelps, and, with his nose on the ground, and his tail in the air, pattered off upon the trail at a pace which strained his leash and kept us at the top of our speed.
Our course led right across the grounds, in and out among the trenches and pits with which they were scarred and intersected.
The whole place, with its scattered dirt-heaps and ill-grown shrubs, had a blighted, ill-omened look which harmonized with the black tragedy which hung over it.
On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly, underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screened by a young beech.
Where the two walls joined, several bricks had been loosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon the lower side, as though they had frequently been used as a ladder.
"There's the print of wooden-leg's hand," he remarked, as I mounted up beside him. "You see the slight smudge of blood upon the white plaster.
What a lucky thing it is that we have had no very heavy rain since yesterday! The scent will lie upon the road in spite of their eight-and-twenty hours' start.
I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the great traffic which had passed along the London road in the interval.
My fears were soon appeased, however. Toby never hesitated or swerved, but waddled on in his peculiar rolling fashion.
"Do not imagine," said Holmes, "that I depend for my success in this case upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having put his foot in the chemical.
I have knowledge now which would enable me to trace them in many different ways. This, however, is the readiest and, since fortune has put it into our hands, I should be culpable if I neglected it.
It has, however, prevented the case from becoming the pretty little intellectual problem which it at one time promised to be.
"There is credit, and to spare," said I. "I assure you, Holmes, that I marvel at the means by which you obtain your results in this case, even more than I did in the Jefferson Hope Murder.
The thing seems to me to be deeper and more inexplicable. How, for example, could you describe with such confidence the wooden-legged man?
Pshaw, my dear boy! it was simplicity itself. I don't wish to be theatrical. It is all patent and above-board.
Two officers who are in command of a convict-guard learn an important secret as to buried treasure. A map is drawn for them by an Englishman named Jonathan Small.
Aided by this chart, the officers-or one of them-gets the treasure and brings it to England, leaving, we will suppose, some condition under which he received it unfulfilled.
Now, then, why did not Jonathan Small get the treasure himself? The answer is obvious. The chart is dated at a time when Morstan was brought into close association with convicts.
Jonathan Small did not get the treasure because he and his associates were themselves convicts and could not get away.
It is more than that. It is the only hypothesis which covers the facts. Let us see how it fits in with the sequel.
Major Sholto remains at peace for some years, happy in the possession of his treasure. Then he receives a letter from India which gives him a great fright.
Or had escaped. That is much more likely, for he would have known what their term of imprisonment was.
Now, only one white man's name is on the chart. The others are Hindoos or Mohammedans. There is no other white man.
Therefore we may say with confidence that the wooden-legged man is identical with Jonathan Small. Does the reasoning strike you as being faulty?
Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small. Let us look at it from his point of view.
He comes to England with the double idea of regaining what he would consider to be his rights and of having his revenge upon the man who had wronged him.
He found out where Sholto lived, and very possibly he established communications with some one inside the house.
There is this butler, Lal Rao, whom we have not seen. Mrs. Bernstone gives him far from a good character.
Small could not find out, however, where the treasure was hid, for no one ever knew, save the major and one faithful servant who had died.
Whimsical and bizarre conceits of this kind are common enough in the annals of crime, and usually afford valuable indications as to the criminal.
Now, what could Jonathan Small do? He could only continue to keep a secret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure.
Possibly he leaves England and only comes back at intervals. Then comes the discovery of the garret, and he is instantly informed of it.
We again trace the presence of some confederate in the household. Jonathan, with his wooden leg, is utterly unable to reach the lofty room of Bartholomew Sholto.
He takes with him, however, a rather curious associate, who gets over this difficulty, but dips his naked foot into creasote, whence comes Toby, and a six-mile limp for a half-pay officer with a damaged tendo Achillis.
Quite so. And rather to Jonathan's disgust, to judge by the way he stamped about when he got into the room.
He bore no grudge against Bartholomew Sholto, and would have preferred if he could have been simply bound and gagged.
Ah, well, there is no great mystery in that. But you will know all about it soon enough. How sweet the morning air is!
See how that one little cloud floats like a pink feather from some gigantic flamingo. Now the red rim of the sun pushes itself over the London cloud-bank.
That was like following the brook to the parent lake. He makes one curious but profound remark. It is that the chief proof of man's real greatness lies in his perception of his own smallness.
It argues, you see, a power of comparison and of appreciation which is in itself a proof of nobility.
It is just possible that we may need something of the sort if we get to their lair. Jonathan I shall leave to you, but if the other turns nasty I shall shoot him dead.
He took out his revolver as he spoke, and, having loaded two of the chambers, he put it back into the right-hand pocket of his jacket.
We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down the half-rural villa-lined roads which lead to the metropolis.
Now, however, we were beginning to come among continuous streets, where labourers and dockmen were already astir, and slatternly women were taking down shutters and brushing door-steps.
At the square-topped corner public houses business was just beginning, and rough-looking men were emerging, rubbing their sleeves across their beards after their morning wet.
Strange dogs sauntered up and stared wonderingly at us as we passed, but our inimitable Toby looked neither to the right nor to the left, but trotted onwards with his nose to the ground and an occasional eager whine which spoke of a hot scent.
We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now found ourselves in Kennington Lane, having borne away through the side-streets to the east of the Oval.
The men whom we pursued seemed to have taken a curiously zigzag road, with the idea probably of escaping observation.
They had never kept to the main road if a parallel side-street would serve their turn. At the foot of Kennington Lane they had edged away to the left through Bond Street and Miles Street.
Where the latter street turns into Knight's Place, Toby ceased to advance, but began to run backwards and forwards with one ear cocked and the other drooping, the very picture of canine indecision.
Then he waddled round in circles, looking up to us from time to time, as if to ask for sympathy in his embarrassment.
"What the deuce is the matter with the dog?" growled Holmes. "They surely would not take a cab, or go off in a balloon."
He was indeed off, for after sniffing round again he suddenly made up his mind, and darted away with an energy and determination such as he had not yet shown.
The scent appeared to be much hotter than before, for he had not even to put his nose on the ground, but tugged at his leash and tried to break into a run.
Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick and Nelson's large timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern.
Here the dog, frantic with excitement, turned down through the side-gate into the enclosure, where the sawyers were already at work.
With lolling tongue and blinking eyes, Toby stood upon the cask, looking from one to the other of us for some sign of appreciation.
The staves of the barrel and the wheels of the trolley were smeared with a dark liquid, and the whole air was heavy with the smell of creasote.
Sherlock Holmes and I looked blankly at each other, and then burst simultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.
"He acted according to his lights," said Holmes, lifting him down from the barrel and walking him out of the timber-yard.
If you consider how much creasote is carted about London in one day, it is no great wonder that our trail should have been crossed.
Yes. And, fortunately, we have no distance to go. Evidently what puzzled the dog at the corner of Knight's Place was that there were two different trails running in opposite directions.
There was no difficulty about this. On leading Toby to the place where he had committed his fault, he cast about in a wide circle and finally dashed off in a fresh direction.
"We must take care that he does not now bring us to the place where the creasote-barrel came from," I observed.
I had thought of that. But you notice that he keeps on the pavement, whereas the barrel passed down the roadway.
It tended down towards the river-side, running through Belmont Place and Prince's Street. At the end of Broad Street it ran right down to the water's edge, where there was a small wooden wharf.
Toby led us to the very edge of this, and there stood whining, looking out on the dark current beyond.
"We are out of luck," said Holmes. "They have taken to a boat here." Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the water and on the edge of the wharf.
Close to the rude landing-stage was a small brick house, with a wooden placard slung out through the second window.
"Mordecai Smith" was printed across it in large letters, and, underneath, "Boats to hire by the hour or day."
A second inscription above the door informed us that a steam launch was kept,-a statement which was confirmed by a great pile of coke upon the jetty.
"This looks bad," said he. "These fellows are sharper than I expected. They seem to have covered their tracks.
He was approaching the door of the house, when it opened, and a little, curly-headed lad of six came running out, followed by a stoutish, red-faced woman with a large sponge in her hand.
"You come back and be washed, Jack," she shouted. "Come back, you young imp; for if your father comes home and finds you like that, he'll let us hear of it."
"Dear little chap!" said Holmes, strategically. "What a rosy-cheeked young rascal! Now, Jack, is there anything you would like?"
Lor' bless you, sir, he is that, and forward. He gets a'most too much for me to manage, 'specially when my man is away days at a time.
"Away, is he?" said Holmes, in a disappointed voice. "I am sorry for that, for I wanted to speak to Mr.
He's been away since yesterday mornin', sir, and, truth to tell, I am beginnin' to feel frightened about him.
Why, bless you, sir, it is in the steam launch that he has gone. That's what puzzles me; for I know there ain't more coals in her than would take her to about Woolwich and back.
If he'd been away in the barge I'd ha' thought nothin'; for many a time a job has taken him as far as Gravesend, and then if there was much doin' there he might ha' stayed over.
He might, sir, but it weren't his way. Many a time I've heard him call out at the prices they charge for a few odd bags.
Besides, I don't like that wooden-legged man, wi' his ugly face and outlandish talk. What did he want always knockin' about here for?
"But, my dear Mrs. Smith," said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders, "You are frightening yourself about nothing.
How could you possibly tell that it was the wooden-legged man who came in the night? I don't quite understand how you can be so sure.
His voice, sir. I knew his voice, which is kind o' thick and foggy. He tapped at the winder,-about three it would be.
'Show a leg, matey,' says he: 'time to turn out guard.' My old man woke up Jim,-that's my eldest,-and away they went, without so much as a word to me.
I am sorry, Mrs. Smith, for I wanted a steam launch, and I have heard good reports of the-Let me see, what is her name?
No, indeed. She's as trim a little thing as any on the river. She's been fresh painted, black with two red streaks.
Thanks. I hope that you will hear soon from Mr. Smith. I am going down the river; and if I should see anything of the Aurora I shall let him know that you are uneasy.
"The main thing with people of that sort," said Holmes, as we sat in the sheets of the wherry, "is never to let them think that their information can be of the slightest importance to you.
If you do, they will instantly shut up like an oyster. If you listen to them under protest, as it were, you are very likely to get what you want.
My dear fellow, it would be a colossal task. She may have touched at any wharf on either side of the stream between here and Greenwich.
Below the bridge there is a perfect labyrinth of landing-places for miles. It would take you days and days to exhaust them, if you set about it alone.
No. I shall probably call Athelney Jones in at the last moment. He is not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything which would injure him professionally.
Worse and worse! Our men would know that the chase was hot at their heels, and they would be off out of the country.
As it is, they are likely enough to leave, but as long as they think they are perfectly safe they will be in no hurry.
Jones's energy will be of use to us there, for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the daily press, and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrong scent.
Take this hansom, drive home, have some breakfast, and get an hour's sleep. It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to-night again.
We pulled up at the Great Peter Street post-office, and Holmes despatched his wire. "Whom do you think that is to?"
You remember the Baker Street division of the detective police force whom I employed in the Jefferson Hope case?
This is just the case where they might be invaluable. If they fail, I have other resources; but I shall try them first.
That wire was to my dirty little lieutenant, Wiggins, and I expect that he and his gang will be with us before we have finished our breakfast.
It was between eight and nine o'clock now, and I was conscious of a strong reaction after the successive excitements of the night.
As far as the death of Bartholomew Sholto went, I had heard little good of him, and could feel no intense antipathy to his murderers.
The treasure, however, was a different matter. That, or part of it, belonged rightfully to Miss Morstan.
While there was a chance of recovering it I was ready to devote my life to the one object. True, if I found it it would probably put her forever beyond my reach.
Yet it would be a petty and selfish love which would be influenced by such a thought as that. If Holmes could work to find the criminals, I had a tenfold stronger reason to urge me on to find the treasure.
A bath at Baker Street and a complete change freshened me up wonderfully. When I came down to our room I found the breakfast laid and Holmes pouring out the coffee.
"Here it is," said he, laughing, and pointing to an open newspaper. "The energetic Jones and the ubiquitous reporter have fixed it up between them.
I took the paper from him and read the short notice, which was headed "Mysterious Business at Upper Norwood."
"About twelve o'clock last night," said the _Standard_, "Mr. Bartholomew Sholto, of Pondicherry Lodge, Upper Norwood, was found dead in his room under circumstances which point to foul play.
The discovery was first made by Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson, who had called at the house with Mr. Thaddeus Sholto, brother of the deceased.
This fact, which has been very clearly made out, proves conclusively that it was no mere haphazard burglary.
The prompt and energetic action of the officers of the law shows the great advantage of the presence on such occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind.
We cannot but think that it supplies an argument to those who would wish to see our detectives more decentralised, and so brought into closer and more effective touch with the cases which it is their duty to investigate.
So do I. I wouldn't answer for our safety now, if he should happen to have another of his attacks of energy.
At this moment there was a loud ring at the bell, and I could hear Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail of expostulation and dismay.
As he spoke, there came a swift pattering of naked feet upon the stairs, a clatter of high voices, and in rushed a dozen dirty and ragged little street-Arabs.
There was some show of discipline among them, despite their tumultuous entry, for they instantly drew up in line and stood facing us with expectant faces.
One of their number, taller and older than the others, stood forward with an air of lounging superiority which was very funny in such a disreputable little scarecrow.
"Here you are," said Holmes, producing some silver. "In future they can report to you, Wiggins, and you to me.
I cannot have the house invaded in this way. However, it is just as well that you should all hear the instructions.
I want to find the whereabouts of a steam launch called the _Aurora_, owner Mordecai Smith, black with two red streaks, funnel black with a white band.
She is down the river somewhere. I want one boy to be at Mordecai Smith's landing-stage opposite Millbank to say if the boat comes back.
You must divide it out among yourselves, and do both banks thoroughly. Let me know the moment you have news.
The old scale of pay, and a guinea to the boy who finds the boat. Here's a day in advance. Now off you go!
He handed them a shilling each, and away they buzzed down the stairs, and I saw them a moment later streaming down the street.
"If the launch is above water they will find her," said Holmes, as he rose from the table and lit his pipe.
They can go everywhere, see everything, overhear every one. I expect to hear before evening that they have spotted her.
In the meanwhile, we can do nothing but await results. We cannot pick up the broken trail until we find either the Aurora or Mr. Mordecai Smith.
No; I am not tired. I have a curious constitution. I never remember feeling tired by work, though idleness exhausts me completely.
I am going to smoke and to think over this queer business to which my fair client has introduced us. If ever man had an easy task, this of ours ought to be.
I have no wish to make a mystery of him,-to you, anyway. But you must have formed your own opinion. Now, do consider the data.
Diminutive footmarks, toes never fettered by boots, naked feet, stone-headed wooden mace, great agility, small poisoned darts.
"Hardly that," said he. "When first I saw signs of strange weapons I was inclined to think so; but the remarkable character of the footmarks caused me to reconsider my views.
Some of the inhabitants of the Indian Peninsula are small men, but none could have left such marks as that.
The Hindoo proper has long and thin feet. The sandal-wearing Mohammedan has the great toe well separated from the others, because the thong is commonly passed between.
These little darts, too, could only be shot in one way. They are from a blow-pipe. Now, then, where are we to find our savage?
He stretched his hand up, and took down a bulky volume from the shelf. "This is the first volume of a gazetteer which is now being published.
It may be looked upon as the very latest authority. What have we here? 'Andaman Islands, situated 340 miles to the north of Sumatra, in the Bay of Bengal.'
Hum! hum! What's all this? Moist climate, coral reefs, sharks, Port Blair, convict-barracks, Rutland Island, cottonwoods-Ah, here we are.
The average height is rather below four feet, although many full-grown adults may be found who are very much smaller than this.
They are a fierce, morose, and intractable people, though capable of forming most devoted friendships when their confidence has once been gained.'
Mark that, Watson. Now, then, listen to this. 'They are naturally hideous, having large, misshapen heads, small, fierce eyes, and distorted features.
Their feet and hands, however, are remarkably small. So intractable and fierce are they that all the efforts of the British official have failed to win them over in any degree.
They have always been a terror to shipwrecked crews, braining the survivors with their stone-headed clubs, or shooting them with their poisoned arrows.
Ah, that is more than I can tell. Since, however, we had already determined that Small had come from the Andamans, it is not so very wonderful that this islander should be with him.
No doubt we shall know all about it in time. Look here, Watson; you look regularly done. Lie down there on the sofa, and see if I can put you to sleep.
He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself out he began to play some low, dreamy, melodious air,-his own, no doubt, for he had a remarkable gift for improvisation.
I have a vague remembrance of his gaunt limbs, his earnest face, and the rise and fall of his bow. Then I seemed to be floated peacefully away upon a soft sea of sound, until I found myself in dreamland, with the sweet face of Mary Morstan looking down upon me.
It was late in the afternoon before I woke, strengthened and refreshed. Sherlock Holmes still sat exactly as I had left him, save that he had laid aside his violin and was deep in a book.
Unfortunately, no. I confess that I am surprised and disappointed. I expected something definite by this time.
Wiggins has just been up to report. He says that no trace can be found of the launch. It is a provoking check, for every hour is of importance.
No, we can do nothing. We can only wait. If we go ourselves, the message might come in our absence, and delay be caused.
"I would not tell them too much," said Holmes. "Women are never to be entirely trusted,-not the best of them."
I did not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment. "I shall be back in an hour or two," I remarked.
All right! Good luck! But, I say, if you are crossing the river you may as well return Toby, for I don't think it is at all likely that we shall have any use for him now.
I took our mongrel accordingly, and left him, together with a half-sovereign, at the old naturalist's in Pinchin Lane.
At Camberwell I found Miss Morstan a little weary after her night's adventures, but very eager to hear the news.
Mrs. Forrester, too, was full of curiosity. I told them all that we had done, suppressing, however, the more dreadful parts of the tragedy.
Thus, although I spoke of Mr. Sholto's death, I said nothing of the exact manner and method of it. With all my omissions, however, there was enough to startle and amaze them.
"It is a romance!" cried Mrs. Forrester. "An injured lady, half a million in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged ruffian.
Why, Mary, your fortune depends upon the issue of this search. I don't think that you are nearly excited enough.
It sent a little thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she showed no sign of elation at the prospect.
On the contrary, she gave a toss of her proud head, as though the matter were one in which she took small interest.
"It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious," she said. "Nothing else is of any consequence; but I think that he has behaved most kindly and honourably throughout.
It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time I reached home. My companion's book and pipe lay by his chair, but he had disappeared.
"I suppose that Mr. Sherlock Holmes has gone out," I said to Mrs. Hudson as she came up to lower the blinds.
"No, sir. He has gone to his room, sir. Do you know, sir," sinking her voice into an impressive whisper, "I am afraid for his health?"
Well, he's that strange, sir. After you was gone he walked and he walked, up and down, and up and down, until I was weary of the sound of his footstep.
Then I heard him talking to himself and muttering, and every time the bell rang out he came on the stairhead, with 'What is that, Mrs.
Hudson?' And now he has slammed off to his room, but I can hear him walking away the same as ever. I hope he's not going to be ill, sir.
I ventured to say something to him about cooling medicine, but he turned on me, sir, with such a look that I don't know how ever I got out of the room.
"I don't think that you have any cause to be uneasy, Mrs. Hudson," I answered. "I have seen him like this before.
He has some small matter upon his mind which makes him restless." I tried to speak lightly to our worthy landlady, but I was myself somewhat uneasy when through the long night I still from time to time heard the dull sound of his tread, and knew how his keen spirit was chafing against this involuntary inaction.
At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard, with a little fleck of feverish colour upon either cheek.
"No, I could not sleep," he answered. "This infernal problem is consuming me. It is too much to be balked by so petty an obstacle, when all else had been overcome.
I know the men, the launch, everything; and yet I can get no news. I have set other agencies at work, and used every means at my disposal.
The whole river has been searched on either side, but there is no news, nor has Mrs. Smith heard of her husband.
I shall come to the conclusion soon that they have scuttled the craft. But there are objections to that.
I have considered that possibility too, and there is a search-party who will work up as far as Richmond.
If no news comes to-day, I shall start off myself to-morrow, and go for the men rather than the boat.
We did not, however. Not a word came to us either from Wiggins or from the other agencies. There were articles in most of the papers upon the Norwood tragedy.
They all appeared to be rather hostile to the unfortunate Thaddeus Sholto. No fresh details were to be found, however, in any of them, save that an inquest was to be held upon the following day.
I walked over to Camberwell in the evening to report our ill success to the ladies, and on my return I found Holmes dejected and somewhat morose.
Up to the small hours of the morning I could hear the clinking of his test-tubes which told me that he was still engaged in his malodorous experiment.
In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find him standing by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress with a pea-jacket, and a coarse red scarf round his neck.
"I am off down the river, Watson," said he. "I have been turning it over in my mind, and I can see only one way out of it.
I want you to open all notes and telegrams, and to act on your own judgment if any news should come. Can I rely upon you?
I am afraid that you will not be able to wire to me, for I can hardly tell yet where I may find myself.
If I am in luck, however, I may not be gone so very long. I shall have news of some sort or other before I get back.
I had heard nothing of him by breakfast-time. On opening the _Standard_, however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to the business.
"With reference to the Upper Norwood tragedy," it remarked, "we have reason to believe that the matter promises to be even more complex and mysterious than was originally supposed.
Fresh evidence has shown that it is quite impossible that Mr. Thaddeus Sholto could have been in any way concerned in the matter.
"That is satisfactory so far as it goes," thought I. "Friend Sholto is safe, at any rate. I wonder what the fresh clue may be; though it seems to be a stereotyped form whenever the police have made a blunder."
I tossed the paper down upon the table, but at that moment my eye caught an advertisement in the agony column.
Lost.-Whereas Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son, Jim, left Smith's Wharf at or about three o'clock last Tuesday morning in the steam launch _Aurora_, black with two red stripes, funnel black with a white band, the sum of five pounds will be paid to any one who can give information to Mrs. Smith, at Smith's Wharf, or at 221_b_ Baker Street, as to the whereabouts of the said Mordecai Smith and the launch _Aurora_.
This was clearly Holmes's doing. The Baker Street address was enough to prove that. It struck me as rather ingenious, because it might be read by the fugitives without their seeing in it more than the natural anxiety of a wife for her missing husband.
It was a long day. Every time that a knock came to the door, or a sharp step passed in the street, I imagined that it was either Holmes returning or an answer to his advertisement.
I tried to read, but my thoughts would wander off to our strange quest and to the ill-assorted and villainous pair whom we were pursuing.
Could there be, I wondered, some radical flaw in my companion's reasoning. Might he be suffering from some huge self-deception?
Was it not possible that his nimble and speculative mind had built up this wild theory upon faulty premises?
Yet, on the other hand, I had myself seen the evidence, and I had heard the reasons for his deductions.
At three o'clock in the afternoon there was a loud peal at the bell, an authoritative voice in the hall, and, to my surprise, no less a person than Mr. Athelney Jones was shown up to me.
Very different was he, however, from the brusque and masterful professor of common sense who had taken over the case so confidently at Upper Norwood.
Yes, and I cannot be sure when he will be back. But perhaps you would care to wait. Take that chair and try one of these cigars.
Well, half a glass. It is very hot for the time of year; and I have had a good deal to worry and try me.
Well, I have been obliged to reconsider it. I had my net drawn tightly round Mr. Sholto, sir, when pop he went through a hole in the middle of it.
He was able to prove an alibi which could not be shaken. From the time that he left his brother's room he was never out of sight of some one or other.
So it could not be he who climbed over roofs and through trap-doors. It's a very dark case, and my professional credit is at stake.
"Your friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes is a wonderful man, sir," said he, in a husky and confidential voice.
He's a man who is not to be beat. I have known that young man go into a good many cases, but I never saw the case yet that he could not throw a light upon.
He is irregular in his methods, and a little quick perhaps in jumping at theories, but, on the whole, I think he would have made a most promising officer, and I don't care who knows it.
I have had a wire from him this morning, by which I understand that he has got some clue to this Sholto business.
He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me. It was dated from Poplar at twelve o'clock.
"Go to Baker Street at once," it said. "If I have not returned, wait for me. I am close on the track of the Sholto gang.
"Ah, then he has been at fault too," exclaimed Jones, with evident satisfaction. "Even the best of us are thrown off sometimes.
Of course this may prove to be a false alarm; but it is my duty as an officer of the law to allow no chance to slip.
A heavy step was heard ascending the stair, with a great wheezing and rattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for breath.
Once or twice he stopped, as though the climb were too much for him, but at last he made his way to our door and entered.
His appearance corresponded to the sounds which we had heard. He was an aged man, clad in seafaring garb, with an old pea-jacket buttoned up to his throat.
His back was bowed, his knees were shaky, and his breathing was painfully asthmatic. As he leaned upon a thick oaken cudgel his shoulders heaved in the effort to draw the air into his lungs.
Altogether he gave me the impression of a respectable master mariner who had fallen into years and poverty.
Yes. I knows well where it is. An' I knows where the men he is after are. An' I knows where the treasure is.
No, no; I ain't goin' to lose a whole day to please no one. If Mr. Holmes ain't here, then Mr. Holmes must find it all out for himself.
"Wait a bit, my friend," said he. "You have important information, and you must not walk off. We shall keep you, whether you like or not, until our friend returns."
The old man made a little run towards the door, but, as Athelney Jones put his broad back up against it, he recognised the uselessness of resistance.
"Pretty sort o' treatment this!" he cried, stamping his stick. "I come here to see a gentleman, and you two, who I never saw in my life, seize me and treat me in this fashion!"
"You will be none the worse," I said. "We shall recompense you for the loss of your time. Sit over here on the sofa, and you will not have long to wait."
He came across sullenly enough, and seated himself with his face resting on his hands. Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk.
"Here is the old man," said he, holding out a heap of white hair. "Here he is,-wig, whiskers, eyebrows, and all.
"Ah, You rogue!" cried Jones, highly delighted. "You would have made an actor, and a rare one. You had the proper workhouse cough, and those weak legs of yours are worth ten pounds a week.
It has all come to nothing. I have had to release two of my prisoners, and there is no evidence against the other two.
Never mind. We shall give you two others in the place of them. But you must put yourself under my orders.
You are welcome to all the official credit, but you must act on the line that I point out. Is that agreed?
Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat-a steam launch-to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o'clock.
That is easily managed. There is always one about there; but I can step across the road and telephone to make sure.
When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. I think that it would be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box round to the young lady to whom half of it rightfully belongs.
"Rather an irregular proceeding," said Jones, shaking his head. "However, the whole thing is irregular, and I suppose we must wink at it.
The treasure must afterwards be handed over to the authorities until after the official investigation.
Certainly. That is easily managed. One other point. I should much like to have a few details about this matter from the lips of Jonathan Small himself.
You know I like to work the detail of my cases out. There is no objection to my having an unofficial interview with him, either here in my rooms or elsewhere, as long as he is efficiently guarded?
Well, you are master of the situation. I have had no proof yet of the existence of this Jonathan Small.
Only that I insist upon your dining with us. It will be ready in half an hour. I have oysters and a brace of grouse, with something a little choice in white wines.-Watson, you have never yet recognised my merits as a housekeeper.
Our meal was a merry one. Holmes could talk exceedingly well when he chose, and that night he did choose.
For myself, I felt elated at the thought that we were nearing the end of our task, and I caught something of Holmes's gaiety.
When the cloth was cleared, Holmes glanced at his watch, and filled up three glasses with port. "One bumper," said he, "to the success of our little expedition.
You had best take it, then. It is well to be prepared. I see that the cab is at the door. I ordered it for half-past six.
It was a little past seven before we reached the Westminster wharf, and found our launch awaiting us.
The small change was made, we stepped on board, and the ropes were cast off. Jones, Holmes, and I sat in the stern.
Our craft was evidently a very fast one. We shot past the long lines of loaded barges as though they were stationary.
We shall have to catch the _Aurora_, and she has a name for being a clipper. I will tell you how the land lies, Watson.
Well, I gave my mind a thorough rest by plunging into a chemical analysis. One of our greatest statesmen has said that a change of work is the best rest.
So it is. When I had succeeded in dissolving the hydrocarbon which I was at work at, I came back to our problem of the Sholtos, and thought the whole matter out again.
My boys had been up the river and down the river without result. The launch was not at any landing-stage or wharf, nor had it returned.
Yet it could hardly have been scuttled to hide their traces,-though that always remained as a possible hypothesis if all else failed.
I knew this man Small had a certain degree of low cunning, but I did not think him capable of anything in the nature of delicate finesse.
"It seems to me to be a little weak," said I. "It is more probable that he had arranged his affairs before ever he set out upon his expedition."
No, I hardly think so. This lair of his would be too valuable a retreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was sure that he could do without it.
He was quite sharp enough to see that. They had started from their head-quarters under cover of darkness, and he would wish to get back before it was broad light.
Now, it was past three o'clock, according to Mrs. Smith, when they got the boat. It would be quite bright, and people would be about in an hour or so.
Therefore, I argued, they did not go very far. They paid Smith well to hold his tongue, reserved his launch for the final escape, and hurried to their lodgings with the treasure-box.
In a couple of nights, when they had time to see what view the papers took, and whether there was any suspicion, they would make their way under cover of darkness to some ship at Gravesend or in the Downs, where no doubt they had already arranged for passages to America or the Colonies.
Quite so. I argued that the launch must be no great way off, in spite of its invisibility. I then put myself in the place of Small, and looked at it as a man of his capacity would.
He would probably consider that to send back the launch or to keep it at a wharf would make pursuit easy if the police did happen to get on his track.
How, then, could he conceal the launch and yet have her at hand when wanted? I wondered what I should do myself if I were in his shoes.
I could only think of one way of doing it. I might hand the launch over to some boat-builder or repairer, with directions to make a trifling change in her.
She would then be removed to his shed or yard, and so be effectually concealed, while at the same time I could have her at a few hours' notice.
It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to be overlooked. However, I determined to act on the idea.
'There ain't naught amiss with her rudder,' said the foreman. 'There she lies, with the red streaks.'
At that moment who should come down but Mordecai Smith, the missing owner? He was rather the worse for liquor.
They had evidently paid him well, for he was very flush of money, chucking shillings about to the men.
I followed him some distance, but he subsided into an ale-house: so I went back to the yard, and, happening to pick up one of my boys on the way, I stationed him as a sentry over the launch.
He is to stand at water's edge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start. We shall be lying off in the stream, and it will be a strange thing if we do not take men, treasure, and all.
"You have planned it all very neatly, whether they are the right men or not," said Jones; "but if the affair were in my hands I should have had a body of police in Jacobson's Yard, and arrested them when they came down."
Which would have been never. This man Small is a pretty shrewd fellow. He would send a scout on ahead, and if anything made him suspicious lie snug for another week.
In that case I should have wasted my day. I think that it is a hundred to one against Smith knowing where they live.
As long as he has liquor and good pay, why should he ask questions? They send him messages what to do.
While this conversation had been proceeding, we had been shooting the long series of bridges which span the Thames.
As we passed the City the last rays of the sun were gilding the cross upon the summit of St. Paul's. It was twilight before we reached the Tower.
"That is Jacobson's Yard," said Holmes, pointing to a bristle of masts and rigging on the Surrey side.
"Cruise gently up and down here under cover of this string of lighters." He took a pair of night-glasses from his pocket and gazed some time at the shore.
"Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them," said Jones, eagerly. We were all eager by this time, even the policemen and stokers, who had a very vague idea of what was going forward.
"We have no right to take anything for granted," Holmes answered. "It is certainly ten to one that they go down-stream, but we cannot be certain.
From this point we can see the entrance of the yard, and they can hardly see us. It will be a clear night and plenty of light.
Dirty-looking rascals, but I suppose every one has some little immortal spark concealed about him. You would not think it, to look at them.
"Winwood Reade is good upon the subject," said Holmes. "He remarks that, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in the aggregate he becomes a mathematical certainty.
You can, for example, never foretell what any one man will do, but you can say with precision what an average number will be up to.
Individuals vary, but percentages remain constant. So says the statistician. But do I see a handkerchief?
"And there is the _Aurora_," exclaimed Holmes, "and going like the devil! Full speed ahead, engineer.
Make after that launch with the yellow light. By heaven, I shall never forgive myself if she proves to have the heels of us!
She had slipped unseen through the yard-entrance and passed behind two or three small craft, so that she had fairly got her speed up before we saw her.
Now she was flying down the stream, near in to the shore, going at a tremendous rate. Jones looked gravely at her and shook his head.
"We must catch her!" cried Holmes, between his teeth. "Heap it on, stokers! Make her do all she can! If we burn the boat we must have them!"
We were fairly after her now. The furnaces roared, and the powerful engines whizzed and clanked, like a great metallic heart.
Her sharp, steep prow cut through the river-water and sent two rolling waves to right and to left of us.
With every throb of the engines we sprang and quivered like a living thing. One great yellow lantern in our bows threw a long, flickering funnel of light in front of us.
Right ahead a dark blur upon the water showed where the Aurora lay, and the swirl of white foam behind her spoke of the pace at which she was going.
We flashed past barges, steamers, merchant-vessels, in and out, behind this one and round the other. Voices hailed us out of the darkness, but still the Aurora thundered on, and still we followed close upon her track.
"Pile it on, men, pile it on!" cried Holmes, looking down into the engine-room, while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager, aquiline face.
At that moment, however, as our evil fate would have it, a tug with three barges in tow blundered in between us.
It was only by putting our helm hard down that we avoided a collision, and before we could round them and recover our way the Aurora had gained a good two hundred yards.
She was still, however, well in view, and the murky uncertain twilight was setting into a clear starlit night.
Our boilers were strained to their utmost, and the frail shell vibrated and creaked with the fierce energy which was driving us along.
We had shot through the Pool, past the West India Docks, down the long Deptford Reach, and up again after rounding the Isle of Dogs.
The dull blur in front of us resolved itself now clearly enough into the dainty _Aurora_. Jones turned our search-light upon her, so that we could plainly see the figures upon her deck.
One man sat by the stern, with something black between his knees over which he stooped. Beside him lay a dark mass which looked like a Newfoundland dog.
The boy held the tiller, while against the red glare of the furnace I could see old Smith, stripped to the waist, and shovelling coals for dear life.
They may have had some doubt at first as to whether we were really pursuing them, but now as we followed every winding and turning which they took there could no longer be any question about it.
At Greenwich we were about three hundred paces behind them. At Blackwall we could not have been more than two hundred and fifty.
I have coursed many creatures in many countries during my checkered career, but never did sport give me such a wild thrill as this mad, flying man-hunt down the Thames.
Steadily we drew in upon them, yard by yard. In the silence of the night we could hear the panting and clanking of their machinery.
Nearer we came and nearer. Jones yelled to them to stop. We were not more than four boat's lengths behind them, both boats flying at a tremendous pace.
It was a clear reach of the river, with Barking Level upon one side and the melancholy Plumstead Marshes upon the other.
At our hail the man in the stern sprang up from the deck and shook his two clinched fists at us, cursing the while in a high, cracked voice.
He was a good-sized, powerful man, and as he stood poising himself with legs astride I could see that from the thigh downwards there was but a wooden stump upon the right side.
Holmes had already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out mine at the sight of this savage, distorted creature.
He was wrapped in some sort of dark ulster or blanket, which left only his face exposed; but that face was enough to give a man a sleepless night.
Never have I seen features so deeply marked with all bestiality and cruelty. His small eyes glowed and burned with a sombre light, and his thick lips were writhed back from his teeth, which grinned and chattered at us with a half animal fury.
"Fire if he raises his hand," said Holmes, quietly. We were within a boat's-length by this time, and almost within touch of our quarry.
I can see the two of them now as they stood, the white man with his legs far apart, shrieking out curses, and the unhallowed dwarf with his hideous face, and his strong yellow teeth gnashing at us in the light of our lantern.
It was well that we had so clear a view of him. Even as we looked he plucked out from under his covering a short, round piece of wood, like a school-ruler, and clapped it to his lips.
Our pistols rang out together. He whirled round, threw up his arms, and with a kind of choking cough fell sideways into the stream.
The launch with a dull thud ran up upon the mud-bank, with her bow in the air and her stern flush with the water.
The fugitive sprang out, but his stump instantly sank its whole length into the sodden soil. In vain he struggled and writhed.
The two Smiths, father and son, sat sullenly in their launch, but came aboard meekly enough when commanded.
The Aurora herself we hauled off and made fast to our stern. A solid iron chest of Indian workmanship stood upon the deck.
This, there could be no question, was the same that had contained the ill-omened treasure of the Sholtos.
There was no key, but it was of considerable weight, so we transferred it carefully to our own little cabin.
As we steamed slowly up-stream again, we flashed our search-light in every direction, but there was no sign of the Islander.
Somewhere in the dark ooze at the bottom of the Thames lie the bones of that strange visitor to our shores.
"See here," said Holmes, pointing to the wooden hatchway. "We were hardly quick enough with our pistols."
There, sure enough, just behind where we had been standing, stuck one of those murderous darts which we knew so well.
It must have whizzed between us at the instant that we fired. Holmes smiled at it and shrugged his shoulders in his easy fashion, but I confess that it turned me sick to think of the horrible death which had passed so close to us that night.
Our captive sat in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he had done so much and waited so long to gain.
He was a sunburned, reckless-eyed fellow, with a network of lines and wrinkles all over his mahogany features, which told of a hard, open-air life.
There was a singular prominence about his bearded chin which marked a man who was not to be easily turned from his purpose.
He sat now with his handcuffed hands upon his lap, and his head sunk upon his breast, while he looked with his keen, twinkling eyes at the box which had been the cause of his ill-doings.
It seemed to me that there was more sorrow than anger in his rigid and contained countenance. Once he looked up at me with a gleam of something like humour in his eyes.
"And so am I, sir," he answered, frankly. "I don't believe that I can swing over the job. I give you my word on the book that I never raised hand against Mr. Sholto.
It was that little hell-hound Tonga who shot one of his cursed darts into him. I had no part in it, sir.
I was as grieved as if it had been my blood-relation. I welted the little devil with the slack end of the rope for it, but it was done, and I could not undo it again.
"Have a cigar," said Holmes; "and you had best take a pull out of my flask, for you are very wet. How could you expect so small and weak a man as this black fellow to overpower Mr. Sholto and hold him while you were climbing the rope?"
You seem to know as much about it as if you were there, sir. The truth is that I hoped to find the room clear.
I knew the habits of the house pretty well, and it was the time when Mr. Sholto usually went down to his supper.
I shall make no secret of the business. The best defence that I can make is just the simple truth. Now, if it had been the old major I would have swung for him with a light heart.
I would have thought no more of knifing him than of smoking this cigar. But it's cursed hard that I should be lagged over this young Sholto, with whom I had no quarrel whatever.
You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard. He is going to bring you up to my rooms, and I shall ask you for a true account of the matter.
You must make a clean breast of it, for if you do I hope that I may be of use to you. I think I can prove that the poison acts so quickly that the man was dead before ever you reached the room.
That he was, sir. I never got such a turn in my life as when I saw him grinning at me with his head on his shoulder as I climbed through the window.
It was an evil day for me when first I clapped eyes upon the merchant Achmet and had to do with the Agra treasure, which never brought anything but a curse yet upon the man who owned it.
To him it brought murder, to Major Sholto it brought fear and guilt, to me it has meant slavery for life.
At this moment Athelney Jones thrust his broad face and heavy shoulders into the tiny cabin. "Quite a family party," he remarked.
I think I shall have a pull at that flask, Holmes. Well, I think we may all congratulate each other.
Pity we didn't take the other alive; but there was no choice. I say, Holmes, you must confess that you cut it rather fine.
"All is well that ends well," said Holmes. "But I certainly did not know that the Aurora was such a clipper."
Smith says she is one of the fastest launches on the river, and that if he had had another man to help him with the engines we should never have caught her.
"Neither he did," cried our prisoner,-"not a word. I chose his launch because I heard that she was a flier.
We told him nothing, but we paid him well, and he was to get something handsome if we reached our vessel, the _Esmeralda_, at Gravesend, outward bound for the Brazils.
Well, if he has done no wrong we shall see that no wrong comes to him. If we are pretty quick in catching our men, we are not so quick in condemning them.
It was amusing to notice how the consequential Jones was already beginning to give himself airs on the strength of the capture.
From the slight smile which played over Sherlock Holmes's face, I could see that the speech had not been lost upon him.
"We will be at Vauxhall Bridge presently," said Jones, "and shall land you, Dr. Watson, with the treasure-box.
I need hardly tell you that I am taking a very grave responsibility upon myself in doing this. It is most irregular; but of course an agreement is an agreement.
I must, however, as a matter of duty, send an inspector with you, since you have so valuable a charge.
It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first. You will have to break it open. Where is the key, my man?
Hum! There was no use your giving this unnecessary trouble. We have had work enough already through you.
However, doctor, I need not warn you to be careful. Bring the box back with you to the Baker Street rooms.
They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff, genial inspector as my companion.
A quarter of an hour's drive brought us to Mrs. Cecil Forrester's. The servant seemed surprised at so late a visitor.
Mrs. Cecil Forrester was out for the evening, she explained, and likely to be very late. Miss Morstan, however, was in the drawing-room: so to the drawing-room I went, box in hand, leaving the obliging inspector in the cab.
She was seated by the open window, dressed in some sort of white diaphanous material, with a little touch of scarlet at the neck and waist.
One white arm and hand drooped over the side of the chair, and her whole pose and figure spoke of an absorbing melancholy.
At the sound of my foot-fall she sprang to her feet, however, and a bright flush of surprise and of pleasure coloured her pale cheeks.
"I heard a cab drive up," she said. "I thought that Mrs. Forrester had come back very early, but I never dreamed that it might be you.
"I have brought something better than news," said I, putting down the box upon the table and speaking jovially and boisterously, though my heart was heavy within me.
I have brought you something which is worth all the news in the world. I have brought you a fortune.
Yes, this is the great Agra treasure. Half of it is yours and half is Thaddeus Sholto's. You will have a couple of hundred thousand each.
Think of that! An annuity of ten thousand pounds. There will be few richer young ladies in England. Is it not glorious?
I think that I must have been rather overacting my delight, and that she detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I saw her eyebrows rise a little, and she glanced at me curiously.
"No, no," I answered, "not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes. With all the will in the world, I could never have followed up a clue which has taxed even his analytical genius.
She listened with parted lips and shining eyes to my recital of our adventures. When I spoke of the dart which had so narrowly missed us, she turned so white that I feared that she was about to faint.
"It is nothing," she said, as I hastened to pour her out some water. "I am all right again. It was a shock to me to hear that I had placed my friends in such horrible peril."
"That is all over," I answered. "It was nothing. I will tell you no more gloomy details. Let us turn to something brighter.
There is the treasure. What could be brighter than that? I got leave to bring it with me, thinking that it would interest you to be the first to see it.
"It would be of the greatest interest to me," she said. There was no eagerness in her voice, however.
It had struck her, doubtless, that it might seem ungracious upon her part to be indifferent to a prize which had cost so much to win.
"And so heavy!" she exclaimed, trying to raise it. "The box alone must be of some value. Where is the key?"
"Small threw it into the Thames," I answered. "I must borrow Mrs. Forrester's poker." There was in the front a thick and broad hasp, wrought in the image of a sitting Buddha.
Under this I thrust the end of the poker and twisted it outward as a lever. The hasp sprang open with a loud snap.
With trembling fingers I flung back the lid. We both stood gazing in astonishment. The box was empty!
As I listened to the words and realised what they meant, a great shadow seemed to pass from my soul. I did not know how this Agra treasure had weighed me down, until now that it was finally removed.
It was selfish, no doubt, disloyal, wrong, but I could realise nothing save that the golden barrier was gone from between us.
"Because you are within my reach again," I said, taking her hand. She did not withdraw it. "Because I love you, Mary, as truly as ever a man loved a woman.
Because this treasure, these riches, sealed my lips. Now that they are gone I can tell you how I love you.
"Then I say, 'Thank God,' too," she whispered, as I drew her to my side. Whoever had lost a treasure, I knew that night that I had gained one.
A very patient man was that inspector in the cab, for it was a weary time before I rejoined him. His face clouded over when I showed him the empty box.
"There goes the reward!" said he, gloomily. "Where there is no money there is no pay. This night's work would have been worth a tenner each to Sam Brown and me if the treasure had been there."
The inspector shook his head despondently, however. "It's a bad job," he repeated; "and so Mr. Athelney Jones will think."
His forecast proved to be correct, for the detective looked blank enough when I got to Baker Street and showed him the empty box.
They had only just arrived, Holmes, the prisoner, and he, for they had changed their plans so far as to report themselves at a station upon the way.
My companion lounged in his arm-chair with his usual listless expression, while Small sat stolidly opposite to him with his wooden leg cocked over his sound one.
"Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it," he cried, exultantly. "It is my treasure; and if I can't have the loot I'll take darned good care that no one else does.
I tell you that no living man has any right to it, unless it is three men who are in the Andaman convict-barracks and myself.
I know now that I cannot have the use of it, and I know that they cannot. I have acted all through for them as much as for myself.
It was not to make them rich that we did for Achmet. You'll find the treasure where the key is, and where little Tonga is.
When I saw that your launch must catch us, I put the loot away in a safe place. There are no rupees for you this journey.
"You are deceiving us, Small," said Athelney Jones, sternly. "If you had wished to throw the treasure into the Thames it would have been easier for you to have thrown box and all."
Now that they are scattered over five miles or so, it may be a harder job. It went to my heart to do it, though.
I was half mad when you came up with us. However, there's no good grieving over it. I've had ups in my life, and I've had downs, but I've learned not to cry over spilled milk.
"This is a very serious matter, Small," said the detective. "If you had helped justice, instead of thwarting it in this way, you would have had a better chance at your trial."
"Justice!" snarled the ex-convict. "A pretty justice! Whose loot is this, if it is not ours? Where is the justice that I should give it up to those who have never earned it?
That was how I earned the Agra treasure; and you talk to me of justice because I cannot bear to feel that I have paid this price only that another may enjoy it!
I would rather swing a score of times, or have one of Tonga's darts in my hide, than live in a convict's cell and feel that another man is at his ease in a palace with the money that should be mine.
Small had dropped his mask of stoicism, and all this came out in a wild whirl of words, while his eyes blazed, and the handcuffs clanked together with the impassioned movement of his hands.
I could understand, as I saw the fury and the passion of the man, that it was no groundless or unnatural terror which had possessed Major Sholto when he first learned that the injured convict was upon his track.
"You forget that we know nothing of all this," said Holmes quietly. "We have not heard your story, and we cannot tell how far justice may originally have been on your side."
I could hear the measured tramp of their footsteps sounding through the lonely corridors. Suddenly it ceased, and I heard voices, and a scuffle, with the sound of blows.
A moment later there came, to my horror, a rush of footsteps coming in my direction, with the loud breathing of a running man.
I have never seen a man run so fast as that little merchant. He was gaining on the Sikh, and I could see that if he once passed me and got to the open air he would save himself yet.
My heart softened to him, but again the thought of his treasure turned me hard and bitter. I cast my firelock between his legs as he raced past, and he rolled twice over like a shot rabbit.
Ere he could stagger to his feet the Sikh was upon him, and buried his knife twice in his side. The man never uttered moan nor moved muscle, but lay were he had fallen.
I think myself that he may have broken his neck with the fall. You see, gentlemen, that I am keeping my promise.
I am telling you every work of the business just exactly as it happened, whether it is in my favour or not.
He stopped, and held out his manacled hands for the whiskey-and-water which Holmes had brewed for him.
Besides, it was my life or his when once he was in the fort. If he had got out, the whole business would come to light, and I should have been court-martialled and shot as likely as not; for people were not very lenient at a time like that.
I don't know that I have anything else to tell you. I had heard a waterman speak of the speed of Smith's launch the _Aurora_, so I thought she would be a handy craft for our escape.
I engaged with old Smith, and was to give him a big sum if he got us safe to our ship. He knew, no doubt, that there was some screw loose, but he was not in our secrets.
All this is the truth, and if I tell it to you, gentlemen, it is not to amuse you,-for you have not done me a very good turn,-but it is because I believe the best defence I can make is just to hold back nothing, but let all the world know how badly I have myself been served by Major Sholto, and how innocent I am of the death of his son.
"A very remarkable account," said Sherlock Holmes. "A fitting wind-up to an extremely interesting case.
There is nothing at all new to me in the latter part of your narrative, except that you brought your own rope.
That I did not know. By the way, I had hoped that Tonga had lost all his darts; yet he managed to shoot one at us in the boat.
I shall feel more at ease when we have our story-teller here safe under lock and key. The cab still waits, and there are two inspectors downstairs.
I am much obliged to you both for your assistance. Of course you will be wanted at the trial. Good-night to you.
"You first, Small," remarked the wary Jones as they left the room. "I'll take particular care that you don't club me with your wooden leg, whatever you may have done to the gentleman at the Andaman Isles."
"Well, and there is the end of our little drama," I remarked, after we had set some time smoking in silence.
I fear that it may be the last investigation in which I shall have the chance of studying your methods.
Not at all. I think she is one of the most charming young ladies I ever met, and might have been most useful in such work as we have been doing.
She had a decided genius that way: witness the way in which she preserved that Agra plan from all the other papers of her father.
But love is an emotional thing, and whatever is emotional is opposed to that true cold reason which I place above all things.
"Strange," said I, "how terms of what in another man I should call laziness alternate with your fits of splendid energy and vigour."
"The division seems rather unfair," I remarked. "You have done all the work in this business. I get a wife out of it, Jones gets the credit, pray what remains for you?"
"For me," said Sherlock Holmes, "there still remains the cocaine-bottle." And he stretched his long white hand up for it.
I was not surprised. Indeed, my only wonder was that he had not already been mixed up in this extraordinary case, which was the one topic of conversation through the length and breadth of England.
Fresh editions of every paper had been sent up by our news agent, only to be glanced over and tossed down into a corner.
When, therefore, he suddenly announced his intention of setting out for the scene of the drama it was only what I had both expected and hoped for.
We have, I think, just time to catch our train at Paddington, and I will go further into the matter upon our journey.
We had left Reading far behind us before he thrust the last one of them under the seat, and offered me his cigar-case.
"We are going well," said he, looking out the window and glancing at his watch. "Our rate at present is fifty-three and a half miles an hour."
Nor have I. But the telegraph posts upon this line are sixty yards apart, and the calculation is a simple one.
I presume that you have looked into this matter of the murder of John Straker and the disappearance of Silver Blaze?
It is one of those cases where the art of the reasoner should be used rather for the sifting of details than for the acquiring of fresh evidence.
The tragedy has been so uncommon, so complete and of such personal importance to so many people, that we are suffering from a plethora of surmise, conjecture, and hypothesis.
The difficulty is to detach the framework of fact-of absolute undeniable fact-from the embellishments of theorists and reporters.
Then, having established ourselves upon this sound basis, it is our duty to see what inferences may be drawn and what are the special points upon which the whole mystery turns.
On Tuesday evening I received telegrams from both Colonel Ross, the owner of the horse, and from Inspector Gregory, who is looking after the case, inviting my co-operation.
Because I made a blunder, my dear Watson-which is, I am afraid, a more common occurrence than any one would think who only knew me through your memoirs.
The fact is that I could not believe it possible that the most remarkable horse in England could long remain concealed, especially in so sparsely inhabited a place as the north of Dartmoor.
From hour to hour yesterday I expected to hear that he had been found, and that his abductor was the murderer of John Straker.
When, however, another morning had come, and I found that beyond the arrest of young Fitzroy Simpson nothing had been done, I felt that it was time for me to take action.
At least I have got a grip of the essential facts of the case. I shall enumerate them to you, for nothing clears up a case so much as stating it to another person, and I can hardly expect your co-operation if I do not show you the position from which we start.
I lay back against the cushions, puffing at my cigar, while Holmes, leaning forward, with his long, thin forefinger checking off the points upon the palm of his left hand, gave me a sketch of the events which had led to our journey.
'So, you're one of those damned touts!' cried the lad. 'I'll show you how we serve them in King's Pyland.'
He sprang up and rushed across the stable to unloose the dog. The girl fled away to the house, but as she ran she looked back and saw that the stranger was leaning through the window.
A minute later, however, when Hunter rushed out with the hound he was gone, and though he ran all round the buildings he failed to find any trace of him.
"One moment," I asked. "Did the stable-boy, when he ran out with the dog, leave the door unlocked behind him?"
On the other hand, there was no wound upon his person, while the state of Straker's knife would show that one at least of his assailants must bear his mark upon him.
There you have it all in a nutshell, Watson, and if you can give me any light I shall be infinitely obliged to you.
I had listened with the greatest interest to the statement which Holmes, with characteristic clearness, had laid before me.
Though most of the facts were familiar to me, I had not sufficiently appreciated their relative importance, nor their connection to each other.
"Is it not possible," I suggested, "that the incised wound upon Straker may have been caused by his own knife in the convulsive struggles which follow any brain injury?"
"It is more than possible; it is probable," said Holmes. "In that case one of the main points in favour of the accused disappears."
That is the case as it appears to the police, and improbable as it is, all other explanations are more improbable still.
However, I shall very quickly test the matter when I am once upon the spot, and until then I cannot really see how we can get much further than our present position.
It was evening before we reached the little town of Tavistock, which lies, like the boss of a shield, in the middle of the huge circle of Dartmoor.
The latter was Colonel Ross, the well-known sportsman; the other, Inspector Gregory, a man who was rapidly making his name in the English detective service.
"I am delighted that you have come down, Mr. Holmes," said the Colonel. "The Inspector here has done all that could possibly be suggested, but I wish to leave no stone unturned in trying to avenge poor Straker and in recovering my horse."
"I am sorry to say that we have made very little progress," said the Inspector. "We have an open carriage outside, and as you would no doubt like to see the place before the light fails, we might talk it over as we drive."
A minute later we were all seated in a comfortable landau, and were rattling through the quaint old Devonshire city.
Inspector Gregory was full of his case, and poured out a stream of remarks, while Holmes threw in an occasional question or interjection.
Colonel Ross leaned back with his arms folded and his hat tilted over his eyes, while I listened with interest to the dialogue of the two detectives.
"The net is drawn pretty close round Fitzroy Simpson," he remarked, "and I believe myself that he is our man.
At the same time I recognise that the evidence is purely circumstantial, and that some new development may upset it.
My friend Dr. Watson made that suggestion to me as we came down. If so, it would tell against this man Simpson.
Undoubtedly. He has neither a knife nor any sign of a wound. The evidence against him is certainly very strong.
Holmes shook his head. "A clever counsel would tear it all to rags," said he. "Why should he take the horse out of the stable?
If he wished to injure it why could he not do it there? Has a duplicate key been found in his possession?
What chemist sold him the powdered opium? Above all, where could he, a stranger to the district, hide a horse, and such a horse as this?
He says that it was a ten-pound note. One was found in his purse. But your other difficulties are not so formidable as they seem.
He is not a stranger to the district. He has twice lodged at Tavistock in the summer. The opium was probably brought from London.
The key, having served its purpose, would be hurled away. The horse may be at the bottom of one of the pits or old mines upon the moor.
He acknowledges that it is his, and declares that he had lost it. But a new element has been introduced into the case which may account for his leading the horse from the stable.
We have found traces which show that a party of gypsies encamped on Monday night within a mile of the spot where the murder took place.
On Tuesday they were gone. Now, presuming that there was some understanding between Simpson and these gypsies, might he not have been leading the horse to them when he was overtaken, and may they not have him now?
The moor is being scoured for these gypsies. I have also examined every stable and out-house in Tavistock, and for a radius of ten miles.
Yes, and that is a factor which we must certainly not neglect. As Desborough, their horse, was second in the betting, they had an interest in the disappearance of the favourite.
Silas Brown, the trainer, is known to have had large bets upon the event, and he was no friend to poor Straker.
Holmes leaned back in the carriage, and the conversation ceased. A few minutes later our driver pulled up at a neat little red-brick villa with overhanging eaves which stood by the road.
We all sprang out with the exception of Holmes, who continued to lean back with his eyes fixed upon the sky in front of him, entirely absorbed in his own thoughts.
It was only when I touched his arm that he roused himself with a violent start and stepped out of the carriage.
"Excuse me," said he, turning to Colonel Ross, who had looked at him in some surprise. "I was day-dreaming."
There was a gleam in his eyes and a suppressed excitement in his manner which convinced me, used as I was to his ways, that his hand was upon a clue, though I could not imagine where he had found it.
I think that I should prefer to stay here a little and go into one or two questions of detail. Straker was brought back here, I presume?
I presume that you made an inventory of what he had in his pockets at the time of his death, Inspector?
"I should be very glad." We all filed into the front room and sat round the central table while the Inspector unlocked a square tin box and laid a small heap of things before us.
"This is a very singular knife," said Holmes, lifting it up and examining it minutely. "I presume, as I see blood-stains upon it, that it is the one which was found in the dead man's grasp.
I thought so. A very delicate blade devised for very delicate work. A strange thing for a man to carry with him upon a rough expedition, especially as it would not shut in his pocket.
Three of them are receipted hay-dealers' accounts. One of them is a letter of instructions from Colonel Ross.
This other is a milliner's account for thirty-seven pounds fifteen made out by Madame Lesurier, of Bond Street, to William Derbyshire.
Mrs. Straker tells us that Derbyshire was a friend of her husband's and that occasionally his letters were addressed here.
"Madam Derbyshire had somewhat expensive tastes," remarked Holmes, glancing down the account. "Twenty-two guineas is rather heavy for a single costume.
However there appears to be nothing more to learn, and we may now go down to the scene of the crime.
As we emerged from the sitting-room a woman, who had been waiting in the passage, took a step forward and laid her hand upon the Inspector's sleeve.
No, Mrs. Straker. But Mr. Holmes here has come from London to help us, and we shall do all that is possible.
Dear me! Why, I could have sworn to it. You wore a costume of dove-coloured silk with ostrich-feather trimming.
"Ah, that quite settles it," said Holmes. And with an apology he followed the Inspector outside. A short walk across the moor took us to the hollow in which the body had been found.
You fill me with interest, I perceive that the ground has been trampled up a good deal. No doubt many feet have been here since Monday night.
In this bag I have one of the boots which Straker wore, one of Fitzroy Simpson's shoes, and a cast horseshoe of Silver Blaze.
"My dear Inspector, you surpass yourself!" Holmes took the bag, and, descending into the hollow, he pushed the matting into a more central position.
Then stretching himself upon his face and leaning his chin upon his hands, he made a careful study of the trampled mud in front of him.
"Hullo!" said he, suddenly. "What's this?" It was a wax vesta half burned, which was so coated with mud that it looked at first like a little chip of wood.
He took the boots from the bag, and compared the impressions of each of them with marks upon the ground.
"I am afraid that there are no more tracks," said the Inspector. "I have examined the ground very carefully for a hundred yards in each direction."
"Indeed!" said Holmes, rising. "I should not have the impertinence to do it again after what you say.
But I should like to take a little walk over the moor before it grows dark, that I may know my ground to-morrow, and I think that I shall put this horseshoe into my pocket for luck.
Colonel Ross, who had shown some signs of impatience at my companion's quiet and systematic method of work, glanced at his watch.
"I wish you would come back with me, Inspector," said he. "There are several points on which I should like your advice, and especially as to whether we do not owe it to the public to remove our horse's name from the entries for the Cup."
The Colonel bowed. "I am very glad to have had your opinion, sir," said he. "You will find us at poor Straker's house when you have finished your walk, and we can drive together into Tavistock."
But the glories of the landscape were all wasted upon my companion, who was sunk in the deepest thought.
"It's this way, Watson," said he at last. "We may leave the question of who killed John Straker for the instant, and confine ourselves to finding out what has become of the horse.
Now, supposing that he broke away during or after the tragedy, where could he have gone to? The horse is a very gregarious creature.
If left to himself his instincts would have been either to return to King's Pyland or go over to Mapleton.
Why should he run wild upon the moor? He would surely have been seen by now. And why should gypsies kidnap him?
These people always clear out when they hear of trouble, for they do not wish to be pestered by the police.
They could not hope to sell such a horse. They would run a great risk and gain nothing by taking him.
I have already said that he must have gone to King's Pyland or to Mapleton. He is not at King's Pyland.
Therefore he is at Mapleton. Let us take that as a working hypothesis and see what it leads us to. This part of the moor, as the Inspector remarked, is very hard and dry.
But it falls away towards Mapleton, and you can see from here that there is a long hollow over yonder, which must have been very wet on Monday night.
If our supposition is correct, then the horse must have crossed that, and there is the point where we should look for his tracks.
We had been walking briskly during this conversation, and a few more minutes brought us to the hollow in question.
At Holmes' request I walked down the bank to the right, and he to the left, but I had not taken fifty paces before I heard him give a shout, and saw him waving his hand to me.
The track of a horse was plainly outlined in the soft earth in front of him, and the shoe which he took from his pocket exactly fitted the impression.
"See the value of imagination," said Holmes. "It is the one quality which Gregory lacks. We imagined what might have happened, acted upon the supposition, and find ourselves justified.
We crossed the marshy bottom and passed over a quarter of a mile of dry, hard turf. Again the ground sloped, and again we came on the tracks.
Then we lost them for half a mile, but only to pick them up once more quite close to Mapleton. It was Holmes who saw them first, and he stood pointing with a look of triumph upon his face.
The double track turned sharp off and took the direction of King's Pyland. Holmes whistled, and we both followed along after it.
His eyes were on the trail, but I happened to look a little to one side, and saw to my surprise the same tracks coming back again in the opposite direction.
"One for you, Watson," said Holmes, when I pointed it out. "You have saved us a long walk, which would have brought us back on our own traces.
We had not to go far. It ended at the paving of asphalt which led up to the gates of the Mapleton stables.
"I only wished to ask a question," said Holmes, with his finger and thumb in his waistcoat pocket. "Should I be too early to see your master, Mr. Silas Brown, if I were to call at five o'clock to-morrow morning?"
Bless you, sir, if any one is about he will be, for he is always the first stirring. But here he is, sir, to answer your questions for himself.
No, sir, no; it is as much as my place is worth to let him see me touch your money. Afterwards, if you like.
As Sherlock Holmes replaced the half-crown which he had drawn from his pocket, a fierce-looking elderly man strode out from the gate with a hunting-crop swinging in his hand.
"What's this, Dawson!" he cried. "No gossiping! Go about your business! And you, what the devil do you want here?"
I've no time to talk to every gadabout. We want no strangers here. Be off, or you may find a dog at your heels.
Holmes leaned forward and whispered something in the trainer's ear. He started violently and flushed to the temples.
Holmes smiled. "I shall not keep you more than a few minutes, Watson," said he. "Now, Mr. Brown, I am quite at your disposal."
It was twenty minutes, and the reds had all faded into greys before Holmes and the trainer reappeared.
His bullying, overbearing manner was all gone too, and he cringed along at my companion's side like a dog with its master.
"There must be no mistake," said Holmes, looking round at him. The other winced as he read the menace in his eyes.
Holmes thought a little and then burst out laughing. "No, don't," said he; "I shall write to you about it.
"Yes, I think I can. Well, you shall hear from me to-morrow." He turned upon his heel, disregarding the trembling hand which the other held out to him, and we set off for King's Pyland.
"A more perfect compound of the bully, coward, and sneak than Master Silas Brown I have seldom met with," remarked Holmes as we trudged along together.
He tried to bluster out of it, but I described to him so exactly what his actions had been upon that morning that he is convinced that I was watching him.
Of course you observed the peculiarly square toes in the impressions, and that his own boots exactly corresponded to them.
Again, of course no subordinate would have dared to do such a thing. I described to him how, when according to his custom he was the first down, he perceived a strange horse wandering over the moor.
But are you not afraid to leave the horse in his power now, since he has every interest in injuring it?
My dear fellow, he will guard it as the apple of his eye. He knows that his only hope of mercy is to produce it safe.
The matter does not rest with Colonel Ross. I follow my own methods, and tell as much or as little as I choose.
That is the advantage of being unofficial. I don't know whether you observed it, Watson, but the Colonel's manner has been just a trifle cavalier to me.
I was thunderstruck by my friend's words. We had only been a few hours in Devonshire, and that he should give up an investigation which he had begun so brilliantly was quite incomprehensible to me.
Not a word more could I draw from him until we were back at the trainer's house. The Colonel and the Inspector were awaiting us in the parlour.
"My friend and I return to town by the night-express," said Holmes. "We have had a charming little breath of your beautiful Dartmoor air."
My dear Gregory, you anticipate all my wants. If I might ask you to wait here for an instant, I have a question which I should like to put to the maid.
"I must say that I am rather disappointed in our London consultant," said Colonel Ross, bluntly, as my friend left the room.
"Yes, I have his assurance," said the Colonel, with a shrug of his shoulders. "I should prefer to have the horse."
As we stepped into the carriage one of the stable-lads held the door open for us. A sudden idea seemed to occur to Holmes, for he leaned forward and touched the lad upon the sleeve.
"A long shot, Watson; a very long shot," said he, pinching my arm. "Gregory, let me recommend to your attention this singular epidemic among the sheep.
Colonel Ross still wore an expression which showed the poor opinion which he had formed of my companion's ability, but I saw by the Inspector's face that his attention had been keenly aroused.
Four days later Holmes and I were again in the train, bound for Winchester to see the race for the Wessex Cup.
Colonel Ross met us by appointment outside the station, and we drove in his drag to the course beyond the town.
The Colonel was very angry. "I have been on the turf for twenty years, and never was asked such a question as that before," said he.
Well, that is the curious part of it. You could have got fifteen to one yesterday, but the price has become shorter and shorter, until you can hardly get three to one now.
As the drag drew up in the enclosure near the grand stand I glanced at the card to see the entries. It ran:-
Wessex Plate. 50 sovs each h ft with 1000 sovs added for four and five year olds. Second, £300. Third, £200.
New course (one mile and five furlongs). 1. Mr. Heath Newton's The Negro (red cap, cinnamon jacket). 2.
Colonel Wardlaw's Pugilist (pink cap, blue and black jacket). 3. Lord Backwater's Desborough (yellow cap and sleeves).
"We scratched our other one, and put all hopes on your word," said the Colonel. "Why, what is that? Silver Blaze favourite?"
"Five to four against Silver Blaze!" roared the ring. "Five to four against Silver Blaze! Five to fifteen against Desborough!
"All six there? Then my horse is running," cried the Colonel in great agitation. "But I don't see him.
As I spoke a powerful bay horse swept out from the weighing enclosure and cantered past us, bearing on its back the well-known black and red of the Colonel.
"That's not my horse," cried the owner. "That beast has not a white hair upon its body. What is this that you have done, Mr.
Before they reached us, however, Desborough's bolt was shot, and the Colonel's horse, coming away with a rush, passed the post a good six lengths before its rival, the Duke of Balmoral's Iris making a bad third.
"It's my race, anyhow," gasped the Colonel, passing his hand over his eyes. "I confess that I can make neither head nor tail of it.
Certainly, Colonel, you shall know everything. Let us all go round and have a look at the horse together.
Here he is," he continued, as we made our way into the weighing enclosure, where only owners and their friends find admittance.
You have only to wash his face and his leg in spirits of wine, and you will find that he is the same old Silver Blaze as ever.
My dear sir, you have done wonders. The horse looks very fit and well. It never went better in its life.
I owe you a thousand apologies for having doubted your ability. You have done me a great service by recovering my horse.
The Colonel flushed angrily. "I quite recognise that I am under obligations to you, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but I must regard what you have just said as either a very bad joke or an insult."
Sherlock Holmes laughed. "I assure you that I have not associated you with the crime, Colonel," said he.
"The real murderer is standing immediately behind you." He stepped past and laid his hand upon the glossy neck of the thoroughbred.
Yes, the horse. And it may lessen his guilt if I say that it was done in self-defence, and that John Straker was a man who was entirely unworthy of your confidence.
But there goes the bell, and as I stand to win a little on this next race, I shall defer a lengthy explanation until a more fitting time.
We had the corner of a Pullman car to ourselves that evening as we whirled back to London, and I fancy that the journey was a short one to Colonel Ross as well as to myself, as we listened to our companion's narrative of the events which had occurred at the Dartmoor training-stables upon the Monday night, and the means by which he had unravelled them.
"I confess," said he, "that any theories which I had formed from the newspaper reports were entirely erroneous.
And yet there were indications there, had they not been overlaid by other details which concealed their true import.
I went to Devonshire with the conviction that Fitzroy Simpson was the true culprit, although, of course, I saw that the evidence against him was by no means complete.
It was while I was in the carriage, just as we reached the trainer's house, that the immense significance of the curried mutton occurred to me.
You may remember that I was distrait, and remained sitting after you had all alighted. I was marvelling in my own mind how I could possibly have overlooked so obvious a clue.
And they did so. You cannot have forgotten the singular knife which was found in the dead man's hand, a knife which certainly no sane man would choose for a weapon.
It was, as Dr. Watson told us, a form of knife which is used for the most delicate operations known in surgery.
A horse so treated would develop a slight lameness, which would be put down to a strain in exercise or a touch of rheumatism, but never to foul play.
"I have been blind!" cried the Colonel. "Of course that was why he needed the candle, and struck the match."
From that time on all was plain. Straker had led out the horse to a hollow where his light would be invisible.
Simpson in his flight had dropped his cravat, and Straker had picked it up-with some idea, perhaps, that he might use it in securing the horse's leg.
He had already, in spite of the rain, taken off his overcoat in order to do his delicate task, and so, as he fell, his knife gashed his thigh.
I have no doubt that this woman had plunged him over head and ears in debt, and so led him into this miserable plot.
Ah, it bolted, and was cared for by one of your neighbours. We must have an amnesty in that direction, I think.
This is Clapham Junction, if I am not mistaken, and we shall be in Victoria in less than ten minutes.
If you care to smoke a cigar in our rooms, Colonel, I shall be happy to give you any other details which might interest you.
With this short preface I shall turn to my notes of what proved to be a strange, though a peculiarly terrible, chain of events.
It was a blazing hot day in August. Baker Street was like an oven, and the glare of the sunlight upon the yellow brickwork of the house across the road was painful to the eye.
It was hard to believe that these were the same walls which loomed so gloomily through the fogs of winter.
Our blinds were half-drawn, and Holmes lay curled upon the sofa, reading and re-reading a letter which he had received by the morning post.
For myself, my term of service in India had trained me to stand heat better than cold, and a thermometer at ninety was no hardship.
But the morning paper was uninteresting. Parliament had risen. Everybody was out of town, and I yearned for the glades of the New Forest or the shingle of Southsea.
A depleted bank account had caused me to postpone my holiday, and as to my companion, neither the country nor the sea presented the slightest attraction to him.
He loved to lie in the very centre of five millions of people, with his filaments stretching out and running through them, responsive to every little rumour or suspicion of unsolved crime.
Appreciation of nature found no place among his many gifts, and his only change was when he turned his mind from the evil-doer of the town to track down his brother of the country.
Finding that Holmes was too absorbed for conversation I had tossed aside the barren paper, and leaning back in my chair I fell into a brown study.
"Most preposterous!" I exclaimed, and then suddenly realizing how he had echoed the inmost thought of my soul, I sat up in my chair and stared at him in blank amazement.
On my remarking that I was constantly in the habit of doing the same thing you expressed incredulity.
Perhaps not with your tongue, my dear Watson, but certainly with your eyebrows. So when I saw you throw down your paper and enter upon a train of thought, I was very happy to have the opportunity of reading it off, and eventually of breaking into it, as a proof that I had been in rapport with you.
But I was still far from satisfied. "In the example which you read to me," said I, "the reasoner drew his conclusions from the actions of the man whom he observed.
If I remember right, he stumbled over a heap of stones, looked up at the stars, and so on. But I have been seated quietly in my chair, and what clues can I have given you?
You do yourself an injustice. The features are given to man as the means by which he shall express his emotions, and yours are faithful servants.
Your features and especially your eyes. Perhaps you cannot yourself recall how your reverie commenced?
Then I will tell you. After throwing down your paper, which was the action which drew my attention to you, you sat for half a minute with a vacant expression.
Then your eyes fixed themselves upon your newly framed picture of General Gordon, and I saw by the alteration in your face that a train of thought had been started.
But it did not lead very far. Your eyes flashed across to the unframed portrait of Henry Ward Beecher which stands upon the top of your books.
Then you glanced up at the wall, and of course your meaning was obvious. You were thinking that if the portrait were framed it would just cover that bare space and correspond with Gordon's picture over there.
So far I could hardly have gone astray. But now your thoughts went back to Beecher, and you looked hard across as if you were studying the character in his features.
Then your eyes ceased to pucker, but you continued to look across, and your face was thoughtful. You were recalling the incidents of Beecher's career.
You felt so strongly about it that I knew you could not think of Beecher without thinking of that also.
But then, again, your face grew sadder; you shook your head. You were dwelling upon the sadness and horror and useless waste of life.
At this point I agreed with you that it was preposterous and was glad to find that all my deductions had been correct.
It was very superficial, my dear Watson, I assure you. I should not have intruded it upon your attention had you not shown some incredulity the other day.
But I have in my hands here a little problem which may prove to be more difficult of solution than my small essay in thought reading.
Have you observed in the paper a short paragraph referring to the remarkable contents of a packet sent through the post to Miss Cushing, of Cross Street, Croydon?
Ah! then you must have overlooked it. Just toss it over to me. Here it is, under the financial column.
I picked up the paper which he had thrown back to me and read the paragraph indicated. It was headed, "A Gruesome Packet."
At two o'clock yesterday afternoon a small packet, wrapped in brown paper, was handed in by the postman.
A cardboard box was inside, which was filled with coarse salt. On emptying this, Miss Cushing was horrified to find two human ears, apparently quite freshly severed.
Some years ago, however, when she resided at Penge, she let apartments in her house to three young medical students, whom she was obliged to get rid of on account of their noisy and irregular habits.
Some probability is lent to the theory by the fact that one of these students came from the north of Ireland, and, to the best of Miss Cushing's belief, from Belfast.
In the meantime, the matter is being actively investigated, Mr. Lestrade, one of the very smartest of our detective officers, being in charge of the case.
"So much for the _Daily Chronicle_," said Holmes as I finished reading. "Now for our friend Lestrade.
I had a note from him this morning, in which he says: 'I think that this case is very much in your line.
We have every hope of clearing the matter up, but we find a little difficulty in getting anything to work upon.
I shall be either at the house or in the police-station all day.' What say you, Watson? Can you rise superior to the heat and run down to Croydon with me on the off chance of a case for your annals?
You shall have it then. Ring for our boots and tell them to order a cab. I'll be back in a moment when I have changed my dressing-gown and filled my cigar-case.
A shower of rain fell while we were in the train, and the heat was far less oppressive in Croydon than in town.
Holmes had sent on a wire, so that Lestrade, as wiry, as dapper, and as ferret-like as ever, was waiting for us at the station.
It was a very long street of two-story brick houses, neat and prim, with whitened stone steps and little groups of aproned women gossiping at the doors.
Halfway down, Lestrade stopped and tapped at a door, which was opened by a small servant girl. Miss Cushing was sitting in the front room, into which we were ushered.
She was a placid-faced woman, with large, gentle eyes, and grizzled hair curving down over her temples on each side.
"They are in the outhouse, those dreadful things," said she as Lestrade entered. "I wish that you would take them away altogether."
So I shall, Miss Cushing. I only kept them here until my friend, Mr. Holmes, should have seen them in your presence.
"Quite so, madam," said Holmes in his soothing way. "I have no doubt that you have been annoyed more than enough already over this business."
Indeed, I have, sir. I am a quiet woman and live a retired life. It is something new for me to see my name in the papers and to find the police in my house.
I won't have those things in here, Mr. Lestrade. If you wish to see them you must go to the outhouse.
It was a small shed in the narrow garden which ran behind the house. Lestrade went in and brought out a yellow cardboard box, with a piece of brown paper and some string.
There was a bench at the end of the path, and we all sat down while Holmes examined, one by one, the articles which Lestrade had handed to him.
"The string is exceedingly interesting," he remarked, holding it up to the light and sniffing at it. "What do you make of this string, Lestrade?"
Precisely. It is a piece of tarred twine. You have also, no doubt, remarked that Miss Cushing has cut the cord with a scissors, as can be seen by the double fray on each side.
The importance lies in the fact that the knot is left intact, and that this knot is of a peculiar character.
"So much for the string, then," said Holmes, smiling, "now for the box wrapper. Brown paper, with a distinct smell of coffee.
What, did you not observe it? I think there can be no doubt of it. Address printed in rather straggling characters: 'Miss S. Cushing, Cross Street, Croydon.'
Done with a broad-pointed pen, probably a J, and with very inferior ink. The word 'Croydon' has been originally spelled with an 'i,' which has been changed to 'y.'
The parcel was directed, then, by a man-the printing is distinctly masculine-of limited education and unacquainted with the town of Croydon.
So far, so good! The box is a yellow half-pound honeydew box, with nothing distinctive save two thumb marks at the left bottom corner.
It is filled with rough salt of the quality used for preserving hides and other of the coarser commercial purposes.
Yes, I have noticed that. But if this were the practical joke of some students from the dissecting-rooms, it would be as easy for them to send two odd ears as a pair.
The presumption is strongly against it. Bodies in the dissecting-rooms are injected with preservative fluid.
These ears bear no signs of this. They are fresh, too. They have been cut off with a blunt instrument, which would hardly happen if a student had done it.
Again, carbolic or rectified spirits would be the preservatives which would suggest themselves to the medical mind, certainly not rough salt.
A vague thrill ran through me as I listened to my companion's words and saw the stern gravity which had hardened his features.
This brutal preliminary seemed to shadow forth some strange and inexplicable horror in the background.
"There are objections to the joke theory, no doubt," said he, "but there are much stronger reasons against the other.
We know that this woman has led a most quiet and respectable life at Penge and here for the last twenty years.
She has hardly been away from her home for a day during that time. Why on earth, then, should any criminal send her the proofs of his guilt, especially as, unless she is a most consummate actress, she understands quite as little of the matter as we do?
"That is the problem which we have to solve," Holmes answered, "and for my part I shall set about it by presuming that my reasoning is correct, and that a double murder has been committed.
One of these ears is a woman's, small, finely formed, and pierced for an earring. The other is a man's, sun-burned, discoloured, and also pierced for an earring.
These two people are presumably dead, or we should have heard their story before now. To-day is Friday.
The packet was posted on Thursday morning. The tragedy, then, occurred on Wednesday or Tuesday or earlier.
If the two people were murdered, who but their murderer would have sent this sign of his work to Miss Cushing?
We may take it that the sender of the packet is the man whom we want. But he must have some strong reason for sending Miss Cushing this packet.
What reason then? It must have been to tell her that the deed was done! or to pain her, perhaps. But in that case she knows who it is.
Does she know? I doubt it. If she knew, why should she call the police in? She might have buried the ears, and no one would have been the wiser.
That is what she would have done if she had wished to shield the criminal. But if she does not wish to shield him she would give his name.
There is a tangle here which needs straightening out." He had been talking in a high, quick voice, staring blankly up over the garden fence, but now he sprang briskly to his feet and walked towards the house.
"In that case I may leave you here," said Lestrade, "for I have another small business on hand. I think that I have nothing further to learn from Miss Cushing.
"We shall look in on our way to the train," answered Holmes. A moment later he and I were back in the front room, where the impassive lady was still quietly working away at her antimacassar.
"I am convinced, sir," she said, "that this matter is a mistake, and that the parcel was never meant for me at all.
I have said this several times to the gentleman from Scotland Yard, but he simply laughs at me. I have not an enemy in the world, as far as I know, so why should anyone play me such a trick?
Surprise and satisfaction were both for an instant to be read upon his eager face, though when she glanced round to find out the cause of his silence he had become as demure as ever.
I stared hard myself at her flat, grizzled hair, her trim cap, her little gilt earrings, her placid features; but I could see nothing which could account for my companion's evident excitement.
I observed the very instant that I entered the room that you have a portrait group of three ladies upon the mantelpiece, one of whom is undoubtedly yourself, while the others are so exceedingly like you that there could be no doubt of the relationship.
And here at my elbow is another portrait, taken at Liverpool, of your younger sister, in the company of a man who appears to be a steward by his uniform.
Well, you are quite right. But she was married to Mr. Browner a few days afterwards. He was on the South American line when that was taken, but he was so fond of her that he couldn't abide to leave her for so long, and he got into the Liverpool and London boats.
Ah! it was a bad day that ever he took a glass in his hand again. First he dropped me, then he quarrelled with Sarah, and now that Mary has stopped writing we don't know how things are going with them.
It was evident that Miss Cushing had come upon a subject on which she felt very deeply. Like most people who lead a lonely life, she was shy at first, but ended by becoming extremely communicative.
"About your second sister, Sarah," said he. "I wonder, since you are both maiden ladies, that you do not keep house together."
Ah! you don't know Sarah's temper or you would wonder no more. I tried it when I came to Croydon, and we kept on until about two months ago, when we had to part.
I don't want to say a word against my own sister, but she was always meddlesome and hard to please, was Sarah.
Yes, and they were the best of friends at one time. Why, she went up there to live in order to be near them.
And now she has no word hard enough for Jim Browner. The last six months that she was here she would speak of nothing but his drinking and his ways.
He had caught her meddling, I suspect, and given her a bit of his mind, and that was the start of it.
"Thank you, Miss Cushing," said Holmes, rising and bowing. "Your sister Sarah lives, I think you said, at New Street Wallington?
Good-bye, and I am very sorry that you should have been troubled over a case with which, as you say, you have nothing whatever to do.
Very good. Jump in, Watson. We must strike while the iron is hot. Simple as the case is, there have been one or two very instructive details in connection with it.
Holmes sent off a short wire and for the rest of the drive lay back in the cab, with his hat tilted over his nose to keep the sun from his face.
Our driver pulled up at a house which was not unlike the one which we had just quitted. My companion ordered him to wait, and had his hand upon the knocker, when the door opened and a grave young gentleman in black, with a very shiny hat, appeared on the step.
"Miss Sarah Cushing is extremely ill," said he. "She has been suffering since yesterday from brain symptoms of great severity.
As her medical adviser, I cannot possibly take the responsibility of allowing anyone to see her. I should recommend you to call again in ten days.
I did not wish her to tell me anything. I only wanted to look at her. However, I think that I have got all that I want.
Drive us to some decent hotel, cabby, where we may have some lunch, and afterwards we shall drop down upon friend Lestrade at the police-station.
This led him to Paganini, and we sat for an hour over a bottle of claret while he told me anecdote after anecdote of that extraordinary man.
The afternoon was far advanced and the hot glare had softened into a mellow glow before we found ourselves at the police-station.
"Ha! It is the answer!" He tore it open, glanced his eyes over it, and crumpled it into his pocket. "That's all right," said he.
I was never more serious in my life. A shocking crime has been committed, and I think I have now laid bare every detail of it.
Holmes scribbled a few words upon the back of one of his visiting cards and threw it over to Lestrade.
Come on, Watson." We strode off together to the station, leaving Lestrade still staring with a delighted face at the card which Holmes had thrown him.
I have written to Lestrade asking him to supply us with the details which are now wanting, and which he will only get after he has secured his man.
That he may be safely trusted to do, for although he is absolutely devoid of reason, he is as tenacious as a bulldog when he once understands what he has to do, and, indeed, it is just this tenacity which has brought him to the top at Scotland Yard.
It is fairly complete in essentials. We know who the author of the revolting business is, although one of the victims still escapes us.
However, we were really independent of her help. Our answers were waiting for us at the police-station, where I had directed Algar to send them.
Nothing could be more conclusive. Mrs. Browner's house had been closed for more than three days, and the neighbours were of opinion that she had gone south to see her relatives.
It had been ascertained at the shipping offices that Browner had left aboard of the _May Day_, and I calculate that she is due in the Thames to-morrow night.
When he arrives he will be met by the obtuse but resolute Lestrade, and I have no doubt that we shall have all our details filled in.
Sherlock Holmes was not disappointed in his expectations. Two days later he received a bulky envelope, which contained a short note from the detective, and a typewritten document, which covered several pages of foolscap.
"My dear Mr. Holmes,-In accordance with the scheme which we had formed in order to test our theories"-"the 'we' is rather fine, Watson, is it not?
"-"I went down to the Albert Dock yesterday at 6 P.M., and boarded the S.S. _May Day_, belonging to the Liverpool, Dublin, and London Steam Packet Company.
On descending to his berth, I found him seated upon a chest with his head sunk upon his hands, rocking himself to and fro.
He is a big, powerful chap, clean-shaven, and very swarthy- something like Aldridge, who helped us in the bogus laundry affair.
We brought him along to the cells, and his box as well, for we thought there might be something incriminating; but, bar a big sharp knife such as most sailors have, we got nothing for our trouble.
We had three copies typewritten, one of which I enclose. The affair proves, as I always thought it would, to be an extremely simple one, but I am obliged to you for assisting me in my investigation.
"Hum! The investigation really was a very simple one," remarked Holmes, "but I don't think it struck him in that light when he first called us in.
However, let us see what Jim Browner has to say for himself. This is his statement as made before Inspector Montgomery at the Shadwell Police Station, and it has the advantage of being verbatim.
"What is the meaning of it, Watson?" said Holmes solemnly as he laid down the paper. "What object is served by this circle of misery and violence and fear?
It must tend to some end, or else our universe is ruled by chance, which is unthinkable. But what end?
There is the great standing perennial problem to which human reason is as far from an answer as ever.
Now and again, however, it chanced that even when he erred, the truth was still discovered. I have noted of some half-dozen cases of the kind, of which the Affair of the Second Stain and that which I am now about to recount are the two which present the strongest features of interest.
Save for the occasional use of cocaine, he had no vices, and he only turned to the drug as a protest against the monotony of existence when cases were scanty and the papers uninteresting.
For two hours we rambled about together, in silence for the most part, as befits two men who know each other intimately.
"Beg pardon, sir," said our page-boy, as he opened the door. "There's been a gentleman here asking for you, sir."
Holmes glanced reproachfully at me. "So much for afternoon walks!" said he. "Has this gentleman gone, then?"
Half an hour, sir. He was a very restless gentleman, sir, a-walkin' and a-stampin' all the time he was here.
I was waitin' outside the door, sir, and I could hear him. At last he outs into the passage, and he cries, 'Is that man never goin' to come?'
Those were his very words, sir. 'You'll only need to wait a little longer,' says I. 'Then I'll wait in the open air, for I feel half choked,' says he.
'I'll be back before long.' And with that he ups and he outs, and all I could say wouldn't hold him back.
"Well, well, you did your best," said Holmes, as we walked into our room. "It's very annoying, though, Watson.
I was badly in need of a case, and this looks, from the man's impatience, as if it were of importance.
Halloa! That's not your pipe on the table. He must have left his behind him. A nice old briar with a good long stem of what the tobacconists call amber.
I wonder how many real amber mouthpieces there are in London. Some people think that a fly in it is a sign.
Well, he must have been disturbed in his mind to leave a pipe behind him which he evidently values highly.
Well, I should put the original cost of the pipe at seven and sixpence. Now it has, you see, been twice mended, once in the wooden stem and once in the amber.
Each of these mends, done, as you observe, with silver bands, must have cost more than the pipe did originally.
The man must value the pipe highly when he prefers to patch it up rather than buy a new one with the same money.
"Anything else?" I asked, for Holmes was turning the pipe about in his hand, and staring at it in his peculiar pensive way.
He held it up and tapped on it with his long, thin fore-finger, as a professor might who was lecturing on a bone.
"Pipes are occasionally of extraordinary interest," said he. "Nothing has more individuality, save perhaps watches and bootlaces.
The indications here, however, are neither very marked nor very important. The owner is obviously a muscular man, left-handed, with an excellent set of teeth, careless in his habits, and with no need to practise economy.
My friend threw out the information in a very offhand way, but I saw that he cocked his eye at me to see if I had followed his reasoning.
"This is Grosvenor mixture at eightpence an ounce," Holmes answered, knocking a little out on his palm.
He has been in the habit of lighting his pipe at lamps and gas-jets. You can see that it is quite charred all down one side.
Of course a match could not have done that. Why should a man hold a match to the side of his pipe? But you cannot light it at a lamp without getting the bowl charred.
You might do it once the other way, but not as a constancy. This has always been held so. Then he has bitten through his amber.
It takes a muscular, energetic fellow, and one with a good set of teeth, to do that. But if I am not mistaken I hear him upon the stair, so we shall have something more interesting than his pipe to study.
An instant later our door opened, and a tall young man entered the room. He was well but quietly dressed in a dark-grey suit, and carried a brown wide-awake in his hand.
"I beg your pardon," said he, with some embarrassment; "I suppose I should have knocked. Yes, of course I should have knocked.
The fact is that I am a little upset, and you must put it all down to that." He passed his hand over his forehead like a man who is half dazed, and then fell rather than sat down upon a chair.
"I can see that you have not slept for a night or two," said Holmes, in his easy, genial way. "That tries a man's nerves more than work, and more even than pleasure.
Not that only. I want your opinion as a judicious man-as a man of the world. I want to know what I ought to do next.
He spoke in little, sharp, jerky outbursts, and it seemed to me that to speak at all was very painful to him, and that his will all through was overriding his inclinations.
"It's a very delicate thing," said he. "One does not like to speak of one's domestic affairs to strangers.
It seems dreadful to discuss the conduct of one's wife with two men whom I have never seen before. It's horrible to have to do it.
I was about to say that my friend and I have listened to a good many strange secrets in this room, and that we have had the good fortune to bring peace to many troubled souls.
I trust that we may do as much for you. Might I beg you, as time may prove to be of importance, to furnish me with the facts of your case without further delay?
Then suddenly, with a fierce gesture of his closed hand, like one who throws reserve to the winds, he began.
Now there is one thing that I want to impress upon you before I go any further, Mr. Holmes. Effie loves me.
Don't let there be any mistake about that. She loves me with her whole heart and soul, and never more than now.
I know it. I feel it. I don't want to argue about that. A man can tell easily enough when a woman loves him.
That was yesterday, Mr. Holmes, and I have not seen her since, nor do I know anything more about this strange business.
It is the first shadow that has come between us, and it has so shaken me that I do not know what I should do for the best.
Suddenly this morning it occurred to me that you were the man to advise me, so I have hurried to you now, and I place myself unreservedly in your hands.
If there is any point which I have not made clear, pray question me about it. But, above all, tell me quickly what I am to do, for this misery is more than I can bear.
Holmes and I had listened with the utmost interest to this extraordinary statement, which had been delivered in the jerky, broken fashion of a man who is under the influence of extreme emotions.
"Tell me," said he at last, "could you swear that this was a man's face which you saw at the window?"
It seemed to be of an unnatural colour, and to have a strange rigidity about the features. When I approached, it vanished with a jerk.
No; there was a great fire at Atlanta very shortly after his death, and all her papers were destroyed.
Thank you. I should like to think over the matter a little now. If the cottage is now permanently deserted we may have some difficulty.
If, on the other hand, as I fancy is more likely, the inmates were warned of your coming, and left before you entered yesterday, then they may be back now, and we should clear it all up easily.
We shall be with you within an hour of receiving it, and we shall then very soon get to the bottom of the business.
In that case I shall come out to-morrow and talk it over with you. Good-by; and, above all, do not fret until you know that you really have a cause for it.
"I am afraid that this is a bad business, Watson," said my companion, as he returned after accompanying Mr. Grant Munro to the door.
Well, it must be the creature who lives in the only comfortable room in the place, and has her photograph above his fireplace.
Upon my word, Watson, there is something very attractive about that livid face at the window, and I would not have missed the case for worlds.
Yes, a provisional one. But I shall be surprised if it does not turn out to be correct. This woman's first husband is in that cottage.
How else can we explain her frenzied anxiety that her second one should not enter it? The facts, as I read them, are something like this: This woman was married in America.
Her husband developed some hateful qualities; or shall we say that he contracted some loathsome disease, and became a leper or an imbecile?
She flies from him at last, returns to England, changes her name, and starts her life, as she thinks, afresh.
They write to the wife, and threaten to come and expose her. She asks for a hundred pounds, and endeavours to buy them off.
They come in spite of it, and when the husband mentions casually to the wife that there are new-comers in the cottage, she knows in some way that they are her pursuers.
She waits until her husband is asleep, and then she rushes down to endeavour to persuade them to leave her in peace.
Having no success, she goes again next morning, and her husband meets her, as he has told us, as she comes out.
In this way he found the place deserted. I shall be very much surprised, however, if it is still so when he reconnoitres it this evening.
But at least it covers all the facts. When new facts come to our knowledge which cannot be covered by it, it will be time enough to reconsider it.
But we had not a very long time to wait for that. It came just as we had finished our tea. "The cottage is still tenanted," it said.
Have seen the face again at the window. Will meet the seven o'clock train, and will take no steps until you arrive.
He was waiting on the platform when we stepped out, and we could see in the light of the station lamps that he was very pale, and quivering with agitation.
"They are still there, Mr. Holmes," said he, laying his hand hard upon my friend's sleeve. "I saw lights in the cottage as I came down.
I am going to force my way in and see for myself who is in the house. I wish you both to be there as witnesses.
You are quite determined to do this, in spite of your wife's warning that it is better that you should not solve the mystery?
Well, I think that you are in the right. Any truth is better than indefinite doubt. We had better go up at once.
Of course, legally, we are putting ourselves hopelessly in the wrong; but I think that it is worth it.
It was a very dark night, and a thin rain began to fall as we turned from the high road into a narrow lane, deeply rutted, with hedges on either side.
"There are the lights of my house," he murmured, pointing to a glimmer among the trees. "And here is the cottage which I am going to enter."
"There is that creature!" cried Grant Munro. "You can see for yourselves that some one is there. Now follow me, and we shall soon know all."
We approached the door; but suddenly a woman appeared out of the shadow and stood in the golden track of the lamp-light.
"For God's sake, don't Jack!" she cried. "I had a presentiment that you would come this evening. Think better of it, dear!
"I have trusted you too long, Effie," he cried, sternly. "Leave go of me! I must pass you. My friends and I are going to settle this matter once and forever!"
It was a cosey, well-furnished apartment, with two candles burning upon the table and two upon the mantelpiece.
As she whisked round to us, I gave a cry of surprise and horror. The face which she turned towards us was of the strangest livid tint, and the features were absolutely devoid of any expression.
I burst out laughing, out of sympathy with her merriment; but Grant Munro stood staring, with his hand clutching his throat.
She touched a spring, and the front hinged back. There was a portrait within of a man strikingly handsome and intelligent-looking, but bearing unmistakable signs upon his features of his African descent.
But you saw me go, and that was the beginning of my troubles. Next day you had my secret at your mercy, but you nobly refrained from pursuing your advantage.
Three days later, however, the nurse and child only just escaped from the back door as you rushed in at the front one.
And now to-night you at last know all, and I ask you what is to become of us, my child and me?" She clasped her hands and waited for an answer.
It was a long ten minutes before Grant Munro broke the silence, and when his answer came it was one of which I love to think.
He lifted the little child, kissed her, and then, still carrying her, he held his other hand out to his wife and turned towards the door.
"We can talk it over more comfortably at home," said he. "I am not a very good man, Effie, but I think that I am a better one than you have given me credit for being."
Not another word did he say of the case until late that night, when he was turning away, with his lighted candle, for his bedroom.
"Watson," said he, "if it should ever strike you that I am getting a little over-confident in my powers, or giving less pains to a case than it deserves, kindly whisper 'Norbury' in my ear, and I shall be infinitely obliged to you."
Thus as my predecessor weakened his practice declined, until when I purchased it from him it had sunk from twelve hundred to little more than three hundred a year.
I had confidence, however, in my own youth and energy, and was convinced that in a very few years the concern would be as flourishing as ever.
I was surprised, therefore, when, one morning in June, as I sat reading the _British Medical Journal_ after breakfast, I heard a ring at the bell, followed by the high, somewhat strident tones of my old companion's voice.
"Ah, my dear Watson," said he, striding into the room, "I am very delighted to see you! I trust that Mrs. Watson has entirely recovered from all the little excitements connected with our adventure of the Sign of Four."
"And I hope, also," he continued, sitting down in the rocking-chair, "that the cares of medical practice have not entirely obliterated the interest which you used to take in our little deductive problems."
"On the contrary," I answered, "it was only last night that I was looking over my old notes, and classifying some of our past results."
"Ha! Nothing could be better," said Holmes, leaning back in his chair and looking keenly at me from under his half closed lids.
I was confined to the house by a severe chill for three days last week. I thought, however, that I had cast off every trace of it.
I glanced down at the new patent leathers which I was wearing. "How on earth-" I began, but Holmes answered my question before it was asked.
"Your slippers are new," he said. "You could not have had them more than a few weeks. The soles which you are at this moment presenting to me are slightly scorched.
For a moment I thought they might have got wet and been burned in the drying. But near the instep there is a small circular wafer of paper with the shopman's hieroglyphics upon it.
Damp would of course have removed this. You had, then, been sitting with your feet outstretched to the fire, which a man would hardly do even in so wet a June as this if he were in his full health.
Like all Holmes's reasoning the thing seemed simplicity itself when it was once explained. He read the thought upon my features, and his smile had a tinge of bitterness.
"I am afraid that I rather give myself away when I explain," said he. "Results without causes are much more impressive.
"In an instant." I scribbled a note to my neighbour, rushed upstairs to explain the matter to my wife, and joined Holmes upon the door-step.
By the steps, my boy. Yours are worn three inches deeper than his. But this gentleman in the cab is my client, Mr. Hall Pycroft.
Allow me to introduce you to him. Whip your horse up, cabby, for we have only just time to catch our train.
The man whom I found myself facing was a well-built, fresh-complexioned young fellow, with a frank, honest face and a slight, crisp, yellow moustache.
His round, ruddy face was naturally full of cheeriness, but the corners of his mouth seemed to me to be pulled down in a half-comical distress.
It was not, however, until we were all in a first-class carriage and well started upon our journey to Birmingham that I was able to learn what the trouble was which had driven him to Sherlock Holmes.
And now I come to the queer part of the business. I was in diggings out Hampstead way-17, Potter's Terrace.
Well, I was sitting doing a smoke that very evening after I had been promised the appointment, when up came my landlady with a card which had 'Arthur Pinner, Financial Agent,' printed upon it.
I had never heard the name before and could not imagine what he wanted with me; but, of course, I asked her to show him up.
In he walked, a middle-sized, dark-haired, dark-eyed, black-bearded man, with a touch of the Sheeny about his nose.
'Done!' said he. 'We picked him out of the gutter, and he won't leave us so easily.' Those were his very words.
'And you can come up to-morrow evening, at seven, and let me know how you are getting on. Don't overwork yourself.
A couple of hours at Day's Music Hall in the evening would do you no harm after your labours.' He laughed as he spoke, and I saw with a thrill that his second tooth upon the left-hand side had been very badly stuffed with gold.
Of course you expect two brothers to be alike, but not that they should have the same tooth stuffed in the same way.
He bowed me out, and I found myself in the street, hardly knowing whether I was on my head or my heels.
Back I went to my hotel, put my head in a basin of cold water, and tried to think it out. Why had he sent me from London to Birmingham?
Why had he got there before me? And why had he written a letter from himself to himself? It was altogether too much for me, and I could make no sense of it.
And then suddenly it struck me that what was dark to me might be very light to Mr. Sherlock Holmes. I had just time to get up to town by the night train to see him this morning, and to bring you both back with me to Birmingham.
There was a pause after the stockbroker's clerk had concluded his surprising experience. Then Sherlock Holmes cocked his eye at me, leaning back on the cushions with a pleased and yet critical face, like a connoisseur who has just taken his first sip of a comet vintage.
"Rather fine, Watson, is it not?" said he. "There are points in it which please me. I think that you will agree with me that an interview with Mr. Arthur Harry Pinner in the temporary offices of the Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited, would be a rather interesting experience for both of us."
"Oh, easily enough," said Hall Pycroft, cheerily. "You are two friends of mine who are in want of a billet, and what could be more natural than that I should bring you both round to the managing director?"
"Quite so, of course," said Holmes. "I should like to have a look at the gentleman, and see if I can make anything of his little game.
What qualities have you, my friend, which would make your services so valuable? or is it possible that-" He began biting his nails and staring blankly out of the window, and we hardly drew another word from him until we were in New Street.
At seven o'clock that evening we were walking, the three of us, down Corporation Street to the company's offices.
"It is no use our being at all before our time," said our client. "He only comes there to see me, apparently, for the place is deserted up to the very hour he names."
"There he goes!" cried Hall Pycroft. "These are the company's offices into which he has gone. Come with me, and I'll fix it up as easily as possible."
Following his lead, we ascended five stories, until we found ourselves outside a half-opened door, at which our client tapped.
A voice within bade us enter, and we entered a bare, unfurnished room such as Hall Pycroft had described.
His brow glistened with perspiration, his cheeks were of the dull, dead white of a fish's belly, and his eyes were wild and staring.
He looked at his clerk as though he failed to recognise him, and I could see by the astonishment depicted upon our conductor's face that this was by no means the usual appearance of his employer.
"Yes, I am not very well," answered the other, making obvious efforts to pull himself together, and licking his dry lips before he spoke.
"One is Mr. Harris, of Bermondsey, and the other is Mr. Price, of this town," said our clerk, glibly.
They are friends of mine and gentlemen of experience, but they have been out of a place for some little time, and they hoped that perhaps you might find an opening for them in the company's employment.
"Very possibly! Very possibly!" cried Mr. Pinner with a ghastly smile. "Yes, I have no doubt that we shall be able to do something for you.
I have every hope that the company may accommodate you. I will let you know about it as soon as we come to any conclusion.
These last words were shot out of him, as though the constraint which he was evidently setting upon himself had suddenly and utterly burst asunder.
"You forget, Mr. Pinner, that I am here by appointment to receive some directions from you," said he.
"Certainly, Mr. Pycroft, certainly," the other resumed in a calmer tone. "You may wait here a moment; and there is no reason why your friends should not wait with you.
I will be entirely at your service in three minutes, if I might trespass upon your patience so far." He rose with a very courteous air, and, bowing to us, he passed out through a door at the farther end of the room, which he closed behind him.
Then what on earth can he be doing? There is something which I don't understand in this manner. If ever a man was three parts mad with terror, that man's name is Pinner.
Holmes shook his head. "He did not turn pale. He was pale when we entered the room," said he. "It is just possible that-"
Again and much louder came the rat-tat-tat. We all gazed expectantly at the closed door. Glancing at Holmes, I saw his face turn rigid, and he leaned forward in intense excitement.
Then suddenly came a low guggling, gargling sound, and a brisk drumming upon woodwork. Holmes sprang frantically across the room and pushed at the door.
It was fastened on the inner side. Following his example, we threw ourselves upon it with all our weight.
One hinge snapped, then the other, and down came the door with a crash. Rushing over it, we found ourselves in the inner room.
But it was only for a moment that we were at fault. At one corner, the corner nearest the room which we had left, there was a second door.
His knees were drawn up, his head hung at a dreadful angle to his body, and the clatter of his heels against the door made the noise which had broken in upon our conversation.
In an instant I had caught him round the waist, and held him up while Holmes and Pycroft untied the elastic bands which had disappeared between the livid creases of skin.
Then we carried him into the other room, where he lay with a clay-coloured face, puffing his purple lips in and out with every breath-a dreadful wreck of all that he had been but five minutes before.
I stooped over him and examined him. His pulse was feeble and intermittent, but his breathing grew longer, and there was a little shivering of his eyelids, which showed a thin white slit of ball beneath.
"It has been touch and go with him," said I, "but he'll live now. Just open that window, and hand me the water carafe."
I undid his collar, poured the cold water over his face, and raised and sank his arms until he drew a long, natural breath.
Holmes stood by the table, with his hands deep in his trouser's pockets and his chin upon his breast.
"I suppose we ought to call the police in now," said he. "And yet I confess that I'd like to give them a complete case when they come."
"It's a blessed mystery to me," cried Pycroft, scratching his head. "Whatever they wanted to bring me all the way up here for, and then-"
Well, the whole thing hinges upon two points. The first is the making of Pycroft write a declaration by which he entered the service of this preposterous company.
Well, why did they want him to do it? Not as a business matter, for these arrangements are usually verbal, and there was no earthly business reason why this should be an exception.
Don't you see, my young friend, that they were very anxious to obtain a specimen of your handwriting, and had no other way of doing it?
Quite so. Why? When we answer that we have made some progress with our little problem. Why? There can be only one adequate reason.
Some one wanted to learn to imitate your writing, and had to procure a specimen of it first. And now if we pass on to the second point we find that each throws light upon the other.
That point is the request made by Pinner that you should not resign your place, but should leave the manager of this important business in the full expectation that a Mr. Hall Pycroft, whom he had never seen, was about to enter the office upon the Monday morning.
But in the interval the rogue had learned to imitate you, and his position was therefore secure, as I presume that nobody in the office had ever set eyes upon you.
Well, that is pretty clear also. There are evidently only two of them in it. The other is impersonating you at the office.
This one acted as your engager, and then found that he could not find you an employer without admitting a third person into his plot.
That he was most unwilling to do. He changed his appearance as far as he could, and trusted that the likeness, which you could not fail to observe, would be put down to a family resemblance.
But for the happy chance of the gold stuffing, your suspicions would probably never have been aroused.
Hall Pycroft shook his clinched hands in the air. "Good Lord!" he cried, "while I have been fooled in this way, what has this other Hall Pycroft been doing at Mawson's?
Ah yes, they keep a permanent guard there on account of the value of the securities that they hold. I remember hearing it talked of in the City.
Very good; we shall wire to him, and see if all is well, and if a clerk of your name is working there.
That is clear enough; but what is not so clear is why at sight of us one of the rogues should instantly walk out of the room and hang himself.
"The paper!" croaked a voice behind us. The man was sitting up, blanched and ghastly, with returning reason in his eyes, and hands which rubbed nervously at the broad red band which still encircled his throat.
"The paper! Of course!" yelled Holmes, in a paroxysm of excitement. "Idiot that I was! I thought so much of our visit that the paper never entered my head for an instant.
To be sure, the secret must be there." He flattened it out upon the table, and a cry of triumph burst from his lips.
"Look at this, Watson," he cried. "It is a London paper, an early edition of the _Evening Standard_. Here is what we want.
It appeared from its position in the paper to have been the one event of importance in town, and the account of it ran in this way:
His suspicions being aroused, the sergeant followed the man, and with the aid of Constable Pollock succeeded, after a most desperate resistance, in arresting him.
His brother, who usually works with him, has not appeared in this job as far as can at present be ascertained, although the police are making energetic inquiries as to his whereabouts.
"Well, we may save the police some little trouble in that direction," said Holmes, glancing at the haggard figure huddled up by the window.
Human nature is a strange mixture, Watson. You see that even a villain and murderer can inspire such affection that his brother turns to suicide when he learns that his neck is forfeited.
However, we have no choice as to our action. The doctor and I will remain on guard, Mr. Pycroft, if you will have the kindness to step out for the police.
"I have some papers here," said my friend Sherlock Holmes, as we sat one winter's night on either side of the fire, "which I really think, Watson, that it would be worth your while to glance over.
These are the documents in the extraordinary case of the _Gloria Scott_, and this is the message which struck Justice of the Peace Trevor dead with horror when he read it.
He had picked from a drawer a little tarnished cylinder, and, undoing the tape, he handed me a short note scrawled upon a half-sheet of slate-grey paper.
"The supply of game for London is going steadily up," it ran. "Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, has been now told to receive all orders for fly-paper and for preservation of your hen-pheasant's life."
As I glanced up from reading this enigmatical message, I saw Holmes chuckling at the expression upon my face.
I cannot see how such a message as this could inspire horror. It seems to me to be rather grotesque than otherwise.
Very likely. Yet the fact remains that the reader, who was a fine, robust old man, was knocked clean down by it as if it had been the butt end of a pistol.
"You arouse my curiosity," said I. "But why did you say just now that there were very particular reasons why I should study this case?"
I had often endeavoured to elicit from my companion what had first turned his mind in the direction of criminal research, but had never caught him before in a communicative humour.
Now he sat forward in this armchair and spread out the documents upon his knees. Then he lit his pipe and sat for some time smoking and turning them over.
"What an eye you have!" he cried, with a sigh of relief. 'It is just as you say. But we won't talk of it.
Of all ghosts the ghosts of our old lovers are the worst. Come into the billiard-room and have a quiet cigar.'
""From the beginning there was really nothing to prevent us from taking possession of the ship. The crew were a set of ruffians, specially picked for the job.
Yet, safe as it was, we determined to neglect no precaution, and to make our attack suddenly by night.
That was the narrative which I read that night to young Trevor, and I think, Watson, that under the circumstances it was a dramatic one.
The good fellow was heartbroken at it, and went out to the Terai tea planting, where I hear that he is doing well.
As to the sailor and Beddoes, neither of them was ever heard of again after that day on which the letter of warning was written.
They both disappeared utterly and completely. No complaint had been lodged with the police, so that Beddoes had mistaken a threat for a deed.
Hudson had been seen lurking about, and it was believed by the police that he had done away with Beddoes and had fled.
Those are the facts of the case, Doctor, and if they are of any use to your collection, I am sure that they are very heartily at your service.
I have always held, too, that pistol practice should be distinctly an open-air pastime; and when Holmes, in one of his queer humours, would sit in an armchair with his hair-trigger and a hundred Boxer cartridges, and proceed to adorn the opposite wall with a patriotic V. R. done in bullet-pocks, I felt strongly that neither the atmosphere nor the appearance of our room was improved by it.
Our chambers were always full of chemicals and of criminal relics which had a way of wandering into unlikely positions, and of turning up in the butter-dish or in even less desirable places.
He could not deny the justice of my request, so with a rather rueful face he went off to his bedroom, from which he returned presently pulling a large tin box behind him.
This he placed in the middle of the floor and, squatting down upon a stool in front of it, he threw back the lid.
I could see that it was already a third full of bundles of paper tied up with red tape into separate packages.
"There are cases enough here, Watson," said he, looking at me with mischievous eyes. "I think that if you knew all that I had in this box you would ask me to pull some out instead of putting others in."
"These are the records of your early work, then?" I asked. "I have often wished that I had notes of those cases."
"Yes, my boy, these were all done prematurely before my biographer had come to glorify me." He lifted bundle after bundle in a tender, caressing sort of way.
"They are not all successes, Watson," said he. "But there are some pretty little problems among them.
He dived his arm down to the bottom of the chest, and brought up a small wooden box with a sliding lid, such as children's toys are kept in.
From within he produced a crumpled piece of paper, an old-fashioned brass key, a peg of wood with a ball of string attached to it, and three rusty old disks of metal.
Sherlock Holmes picked them up one by one, and laid them along the edge of the table. Then he reseated himself in his chair and looked them over with a gleam of satisfaction in his eyes.
This was excellent news, Watson, for it showed me that I was on the right road. I looked up at the sun.
It was low in the heavens, and I calculated that in less than an hour it would lie just above the topmost branches of the old oak.
One condition mentioned in the Ritual would then be fulfilled. And the shadow of the elm must mean the farther end of the shadow, otherwise the trunk would have been chosen as the guide.
I had, then, to find where the far end of the shadow would fall when the sun was just clear of the oak.
And that's the story of the Musgrave Ritual, Watson. They have the crown down at Hurlstone-though they had some legal bother and a considerable sum to pay before they were allowed to retain it.
I am sure that if you mentioned my name they would be happy to show it to you. Of the woman nothing was ever heard, and the probability is that she got away out of England and carried herself and the memory of her crime to some land beyond the seas.
It was some time before the health of my friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes recovered from the strain caused by his immense exertions in the spring of '87.
They led, however, in an indirect fashion to a singular and complex problem which gave my friend an opportunity of demonstrating the value of a fresh weapon among the many with which he waged his life-long battle against crime.
On referring to my notes I see that it was upon the 14th of April that I received a telegram from Lyons which informed me that Holmes was lying ill in the Hotel Dulong.
Within twenty-four hours I was in his sick-room, and was relieved to find that there was nothing formidable in his symptoms.
My old friend, Colonel Hayter, who had come under my professional care in Afghanistan, had now taken a house near Reigate in Surrey, and had frequently asked me to come down to him upon a visit.
On the last occasion he had remarked that if my friend would only come with me he would be glad to extend his hospitality to him also.
Hayter was a fine old soldier who had seen much of the world, and he soon found, as I had expected, that Holmes and he had much in common.
On the evening of our arrival we were sitting in the Colonel's gun-room after dinner, Holmes stretched upon the sofa, while Hayter and I looked over his little armoury of fire-arms.
"By the way," said he suddenly, "I think I'll take one of these pistols upstairs with me in case we have an alarm."
Yes, we've had a scare in this part lately. Old Acton, who is one of our county magnates, had his house broken into last Monday.
None as yet. But the affair is a petty one, one of our little country crimes, which must seem too small for your attention, Mr. Holmes, after this great international affair.
I fancy not. The thieves ransacked the library and got very little for their pains. The whole place was turned upside down, drawers burst open, and presses ransacked, with the result that an odd volume of Pope's 'Homer,' two plated candlesticks, an ivory letter-weight, a small oak barometer, and a ball of twine are all that have vanished.
You are here for a rest, my dear fellow. For Heaven's sake don't get started on a new problem when your nerves are all in shreds.
Holmes shrugged his shoulders with a glance of comic resignation towards the Colonel, and the talk drifted away into less dangerous channels.
The burglar, sir. He was off like a shot and got clean away. He'd just broke in at the pantry window when William came on him and met his end in saving his master's property.
"Ah, then, we'll step over afterwards," said the Colonel, coolly settling down to his breakfast again.
"It's a baddish business," he added when the butler had gone; "he's our leading man about here, is old Cunningham, and a very decent fellow too.
He'll be cut up over this, for the man has been in his service for years and was a good servant. It's evidently the same villains who broke into Acton's.
Hum! It may prove the simplest matter in the world, but all the same at first glance this is just a little curious, is it not?
A gang of burglars acting in the country might be expected to vary the scene of their operations, and not to crack two cribs in the same district within a few days.
When you spoke last night of taking precautions I remember that it passed through my mind that this was probably the last parish in England to which the thief or thieves would be likely to turn their attention-which shows that I have still much to learn.
"I fancy it's some local practitioner," said the Colonel. "In that case, of course, Acton's and Cunningham's are just the places he would go for, since they are far the largest about here."
Well, they ought to be, but they've had a lawsuit for some years which has sucked the blood out of both of them, I fancy.
Old Acton has some claim on half Cunningham's estate, and the lawyers have been at it with both hands.
"If it's a local villain there should not be much difficulty in running him down," said Holmes with a yawn.
The official, a smart, keen-faced young fellow, stepped into the room. "Good-morning, Colonel," said he; "I hope I don't intrude, but we hear that Mr. Holmes of Baker Street is here."
"The fates are against you, Watson," said he, laughing. "We were chatting about the matter when you came in, Inspector.
Perhaps you can let us have a few details." As he leaned back in his chair in the familiar attitude I knew that the case was hopeless.
We had no clue in the Acton affair. But here we have plenty to go on, and there's no doubt it is the same party in each case.
Yes, sir. But he was off like a deer after the shot that killed poor William Kirwan was fired. Mr. Cunningham saw him from the bedroom window, and Mr. Alec Cunningham saw him from the back passage.
It was quarter to twelve when the alarm broke out. Mr. Cunningham had just got into bed, and Mr. Alec was smoking a pipe in his dressing-gown.
They both heard William the coachman calling for help, and Mr. Alec ran down to see what was the matter.
The back door was open, and as he came to the foot of the stairs he saw two men wrestling together outside.
One of them fired a shot, the other dropped, and the murderer rushed across the garden and over the hedge.
Mr. Cunningham, looking out of his bedroom, saw the fellow as he gained the road, but lost sight of him at once.
Mr. Alec stopped to see if he could help the dying man, and so the villain got clean away. Beyond the fact that he was a middle-sized man and dressed in some dark stuff, we have no personal clue; but we are making energetic inquiries, and if he is a stranger we shall soon find him out.
Not a word. He lives at the lodge with his mother, and as he was a very faithful fellow we imagine that he walked up to the house with the intention of seeing that all was right there.
Of course this Acton business has put every one on their guard. The robber must have just burst open the door-the lock has been forced-when William came upon him.
She is very old and deaf, and we can get no information from her. The shock has made her half-witted, but I understand that she was never very bright.
This was found between the finger and thumb of the dead man. It appears to be a fragment torn from a larger sheet.
You will observe that the hour mentioned upon it is the very time at which the poor fellow met his fate.
You see that his murderer might have torn the rest of the sheet from him or he might have taken this fragment from the murderer.
He may have met him there, may even have helped him to break in the door, and then they may have fallen out between themselves.
"This writing is of extraordinary interest," said Holmes, who had been examining it with intense concentration.
"These are much deeper waters than I had thought." He sank his head upon his hands, while the Inspector smiled at the effect which his case had had upon the famous London specialist.
But this writing opens up-" He sank his head into his hands again and remained for some minutes in the deepest thought.
When he raised his face again, I was surprised to see that his cheek was tinged with colour, and his eyes as bright as before his illness.
"I'll tell you what," said he, "I should like to have a quiet little glance into the details of this case.
"Mr. Holmes is walking up and down in the field outside," said he. "He wants us all four to go up to the house together."
The Inspector shrugged his shoulders. "I don't quite know, sir. Between ourselves, I think Mr. Holmes had not quite got over his illness yet.
"I don't think you need alarm yourself," said I. "I have usually found that there was method in his madness."
"Some folks might say there was madness in his method," muttered the Inspector. "But he's all on fire to start, Colonel, so we had best go out if you are ready."
We found Holmes pacing up and down in the field, his chin sunk upon his breast, and his hands thrust into his trousers pockets.
"The matter grows in interest," said he. "Watson, your country-trip has been a distinct success. I have had a charming morning."
Well, we have seen some very interesting things. I'll tell you what we did as we walk. First of all, we saw the body of this unfortunate man.
Then we had a look at this poor fellow's mother. We could get no information from her, however, as she is very old and feeble.
The conviction that the crime is a very peculiar one. Perhaps our visit now may do something to make it less obscure.
I think that we are both agreed, Inspector that the fragment of paper in the dead man's hand, bearing, as it does, the very hour of his death written upon it, is of extreme importance.
It does give a clue. Whoever wrote that note was the man who brought William Kirwan out of his bed at that hour.
It was torn out of the dead man's hand. Why was some one so anxious to get possession of it? Because it incriminated him.
And what would he do with it? Thrust it into his pocket, most likely, never noticing that a corner of it had been left in the grip of the corpse.
If we could get the rest of that sheet it is obvious that we should have gone a long way towards solving the mystery.
Well, well, it was worth thinking over. Then there is another obvious point. The note was sent to William.
The man who wrote it could not have taken it; otherwise, of course, he might have delivered his own message by word of mouth.
"I have made inquiries," said the Inspector. "William received a letter by the afternoon post yesterday.
"Excellent!" cried Holmes, clapping the Inspector on the back. "You've seen the postman. It is a pleasure to work with you.
We passed the pretty cottage where the murdered man had lived, and walked up an oak-lined avenue to the fine old Queen Anne house, which bears the date of Malplaquet upon the lintel of the door.
Holmes and the Inspector led us round it until we came to the side gate, which is separated by a stretch of garden from the hedge which lines the road.
"Throw the door open, officer," said Holmes. "Now, it was on those stairs that young Mr. Cunningham stood and saw the two men struggling just where we are.
Old Mr. Cunningham was at that window-the second on the left-and he saw the fellow get away just to the left of that bush.
Then Mr. Alec ran out and knelt beside the wounded man. The ground is very hard, you see, and there are no marks to guide us.
As he spoke two men came down the garden path, from round the angle of the house. The one was an elderly man, with a strong, deep-lined, heavy-eyed face; the other a dashing young fellow, whose bright, smiling expression and showy dress were in strange contrast with the business which had brought us there.
"Still at it, then?" said he to Holmes. "I thought you Londoners were never at fault. You don't seem to be so very quick, after all."
"There's only one," answered the Inspector. "We thought that if we could only find-Good heavens, Mr. Holmes!
My poor friend's face had suddenly assumed the most dreadful expression. His eyes rolled upwards, his features writhed in agony, and with a suppressed groan he dropped on his face upon the ground.
Horrified at the suddenness and severity of the attack, we carried him into the kitchen, where he lay back in a large chair, and breathed heavily for some minutes.
"Watson would tell you that I have only just recovered from a severe illness," he explained. "I am liable to these sudden nervous attacks."
Well, since I am here, there is one point on which I should like to feel sure. We can very easily verify it.
Well, it seems to me that it is just possible that the arrival of this poor fellow William was not before, but after, the entrance of the burglar into the house.
"I fancy that is quite obvious," said Mr. Cunningham, gravely. "Why, my son Alec had not yet gone to bed, and he would certainly have heard any one moving about."
"There are some very singular points here," said Holmes, smiling. "Is it not extraordinary that a burglar-and a burglar who had had some previous experience-should deliberately break into a house at a time when he could see from the lights that two of the family were still afoot?"
"Well, of course, if the case were not an odd one we should not have been driven to ask you for an explanation," said young Mr. Alec.
But as to your ideas that the man had robbed the house before William tackled him, I think it a most absurd notion.
"It depends on what the things were," said Holmes. "You must remember that we are dealing with a burglar who is a very peculiar fellow, and who appears to work on lines of his own.
Look, for example, at the queer lot of things which he took from Acton's-what was it?-a ball of string, a letter-weight, and I don't know what other odds and ends.
"Well, we are quite in your hands, Mr. Holmes," said old Cunningham. "Anything which you or the Inspector may suggest will most certainly be done."
I have jotted down the form here, if you would not mind signing it. Fifty pounds was quite enough, I thought.
"I would willingly give five hundred," said the J.P., taking the slip of paper and the pencil which Holmes handed to him.
You see you begin, 'Whereas, at about a quarter to one on Tuesday morning an attempt was made,' and so on.
He was obviously embarrassed for an instant, while the Inspector raised his eyebrows, and Alec Cunningham burst into a laugh.
"And now," said he, "it really would be a good thing that we should all go over the house together and make certain that this rather erratic burglar did not, after all, carry anything away with him."
Before entering, Holmes made an examination of the door which had been forced. It was evident that a chisel or strong knife had been thrust in, and the lock forced back with it.
It is singular that on this particular night he should have been up. Now, I should be very glad if you would have the kindness to show us over the house, Mr. Cunningham.
A stone-flagged passage, with the kitchens branching away from it, led by a wooden staircase directly to the first floor of the house.
It came out upon the landing opposite to a second more ornamental stair which came up from the front hall.
Out of this landing opened the drawing-room and several bedrooms, including those of Mr. Cunningham and his son.
Holmes walked slowly, taking keen note of the architecture of the house. I could tell from his expression that he was on a hot scent, and yet I could not in the least imagine in what direction his inferences were leading him.
"My good sir," said Mr. Cunningham with some impatience, "this is surely very unnecessary. That is my room at the end of the stairs, and my son's is the one beyond it.
I leave it to your judgment whether it was possible for the thief to have come up here without disturbing us.
Still, I must ask you to humour me a little further. I should like, for example, to see how far the windows of the bedrooms command the front.
This, I understand is your son's room"-he pushed open the door-"and that, I presume, is the dressing-room in which he sat smoking when the alarm was given.
Where does the window of that look out to?" He stepped across the bedroom, pushed open the door, and glanced round the other chamber.
The J.P. shrugged his shoulders, and led the way into his own chamber, which was a plainly furnished and commonplace room.
As we moved across it in the direction of the window, Holmes fell back until he and I were the last of the group.
I stooped in some confusion and began to pick up the fruit, understanding for some reason my companion desired me to take the blame upon myself.
"Wait here an instant," said young Alec Cunningham. "The fellow is off his head, in my opinion. Come with me, father, and see where he has got to!"
"'Pon my word, I am inclined to agree with Master Alec," said the official. "It may be the effect of this illness, but it seems to me that-"
His words were cut short by a sudden scream of "Help! Help! Murder!" With a thrill I recognised the voice of that of my friend.
I rushed madly from the room on to the landing. The cries, which had sunk down into a hoarse, inarticulate shouting, came from the room which we had first visited.
In an instant the three of us had torn them away from him, and Holmes staggered to his feet, very pale and evidently greatly exhausted.
The Inspector stared about him in bewilderment. "Oh, come now, Mr. Holmes," said he at last, "I'm sure you don't really mean to-"
Never, certainly, have I seen a plainer confession of guilt upon human countenances. The older man seemed numbed and dazed with a heavy, sullen expression upon his strongly-marked face.
The Inspector said nothing, but, stepping to the door, he blew his whistle. Two of his constables came at the call.
"I have no alternative, Mr. Cunningham," said he. "I trust that this may all prove to be an absurd mistake, but you can see that-Ah, would you?
Drop it!" He struck out with his hand, and a revolver which the younger man was in the act of cocking clattered down upon the floor.
"Keep that," said Holmes, quietly putting his foot upon it; "you will find it useful at the trial. But this is what we really wanted."
Where I was sure it must be. I'll make the whole matter clear to you presently. I think, Colonel, that you and Watson might return now, and I will be with you again in an hour at the furthest.
The Inspector and I must have a word with the prisoners, but you will certainly see me back at luncheon time.
Sherlock Holmes was as good as his word, for about one o'clock he rejoined us in the Colonel's smoking-room.
He was accompanied by a little elderly gentleman, who was introduced to me as the Mr. Acton whose house had been the scene of the original burglary.
"I wished Mr. Acton to be present while I demonstrated this small matter to you," said Holmes, "for it is natural that he should take a keen interest in the details.
I am afraid, my dear Colonel, that you must regret the hour that you took in such a stormy petrel as I am.
"On the contrary," answered the Colonel, warmly, "I consider it the greatest privilege to have been permitted to study your methods of working.
I confess that they quite surpass my expectations, and that I am utterly unable to account for your result.
But, first, as I am rather shaken by the knocking about which I had in the dressing-room, I think that I shall help myself to a dash of your brandy, Colonel.
And now I made a very careful examination of the corner of paper which the Inspector had submitted to us.
It was at once clear to me that it formed part of a very remarkable document. Here it is. Do you not now observe something very suggestive about it?
"My dear sir," cried Holmes, "there cannot be the least doubt in the world that it has been written by two persons doing alternate words.
When I draw your attention to the strong t's of 'at' and 'to', and ask you to compare them with the weak ones of 'quarter' and 'twelve,' you will instantly recognise the fact.
A very brief analysis of these four words would enable you to say with the utmost confidence that the 'learn' and the 'maybe' are written in the stronger hand, and the 'what' in the weaker.
"By Jove, it's as clear as day!" cried the Colonel. "Why on earth should two men write a letter in such a fashion?"
Obviously the business was a bad one, and one of the men who distrusted the other was determined that, whatever was done, each should have an equal hand in it.
We might deduce it from the mere character of the one hand as compared with the other. But we have more assured reasons than that for supposing it.
If you examine this scrap with attention you will come to the conclusion that the man with the stronger hand wrote all his words first, leaving blanks for the other to fill up.
These blanks were not always sufficient, and you can see that the second man had a squeeze to fit his 'quarter' in between the 'at' and the 'to,' showing that the latter were already written.
In this case, looking at the bold, strong hand of the one, and the rather broken-backed appearance of the other, which still retains its legibility although the t's have begun to lose their crossing, we can say that the one was a young man and the other was advanced in years without being positively decrepit.
And now I have to consider the motive of this singular crime. To get at this, I endeavoured first of all to solve the reason of the original burglary at Mr. Acton's.
I understood, from something which the Colonel told us, that a lawsuit had been going on between you, Mr. Acton, and the Cunninghams.
Of course, it instantly occurred to me that they had broken into your library with the intention of getting at some document which might be of importance in the case.
"Precisely so," said Mr. Acton. "There can be no possible doubt as to their intentions. I have the clearest claim upon half of their present estate, and if they could have found a single paper-which, fortunately, was in the strong-box of my solicitors-they would undoubtedly have crippled our case."
"Good heavens!" cried the Colonel, laughing, "do you mean to say all our sympathy was wasted and your fit an imposture?"
"Speaking professionally, it was admirably done," cried I, looking in amazement at this man who was forever confounding me with some new phase of his astuteness.
"It is an art which is often useful," said he. "When I recovered I managed, by a device which had perhaps some little merit of ingenuity, to get old Cunningham to write the word 'twelve,' so that I might compare it with the 'twelve' upon the paper."
When Cunningham saw that the case against him was so strong he lost all heart and made a clean breast of everything.
William was decoyed up and shot, and had they only got the whole of the note and paid a little more attention to detail in the accessories, it is very possible that suspicion might never have been aroused.
If you will only come round at quarter to twelve to the east gate you will learn what will very much surprise you and maybe be of the greatest service to you and also to Annie Morrison.
"It is very much the sort of thing that I expected," said he. "Of course, we do not yet know what the relations may have been between Alec Cunningham, William Kirwan, and Annie Morrison.
The results shows that the trap was skillfully baited. I am sure that you cannot fail to be delighted with the traces of heredity shown in the p's and in the tails of the g's.
The absence of the i-dots in the old man's writing is also most characteristic. Watson, I think our quiet rest in the country has been a distinct success, and I shall certainly return much invigorated to Baker Street to-morrow.
One summer night, a few months after my marriage, I was seated by my own hearth smoking a last pipe and nodding over a novel, for my day's work had been an exhausting one.
My wife had already gone upstairs, and the sound of the locking of the hall door some time before told me that the servants had also retired.
I had risen from my seat and was knocking out the ashes of my pipe when I suddenly heard the clang of the bell.
I looked at the clock. It was a quarter to twelve. This could not be a visitor at so late an hour. A patient, evidently, and possibly an all-night sitting.
With a wry face I went out into the hall and opened the door. To my astonishment it was Sherlock Holmes who stood upon my step.
You look surprised, and no wonder! Relieved, too, I fancy! Hum! You still smoke the Arcadia mixture of your bachelor days then!
There's no mistaking that fluffy ash upon your coat. It's easy to tell that you have been accustomed to wear a uniform, Watson.
You'll never pass as a pure-bred civilian as long as you keep that habit of carrying your handkerchief in your sleeve.
You told me that you had bachelor quarters for one, and I see that you have no gentleman visitor at present.
Thank you. I'll fill the vacant peg then. Sorry to see that you've had the British workman in the house.
Ah! He has left two nail-marks from his boot upon your linoleum just where the light strikes it. No, thank you, I had some supper at Waterloo, but I'll smoke a pipe with you with pleasure.
I handed him my pouch, and he seated himself opposite to me and smoked for some time in silence. I was well aware that nothing but business of importance would have brought him to me at such an hour, so I waited patiently until he should come round to it.
"I see that you are professionally rather busy just now," said he, glancing very keenly across at me.
"Yes, I've had a busy day," I answered. "It may seem very foolish in your eyes," I added, "but really I don't know how you deduced it."
"I have the advantage of knowing your habits, my dear Watson," said he. "When your round is a short one you walk, and when it is a long one you use a hansom.
As I perceive that your boots, although used, are by no means dirty, I cannot doubt that you are at present busy enough to justify the hansom.
But I'll have them, Watson, I'll have them!" His eyes kindled and a slight flush sprang into his thin cheeks.
For an instant only. When I glanced again his face had resumed that red-Indian composure which had made so many regard him as a machine rather than a man.
"The problem presents features of interest," said he. "I may even say exceptional features of interest.
I have already looked into the matter, and have come, as I think, within sight of my solution. If you could accompany me in that last step you might be of considerable service to me.
Then, if you are not too sleepy, I will give you a sketch of what has happened, and of what remains to be done.
I will compress the story as far as may be done without omitting anything vital to the case. It is conceivable that you may even have read some account of the matter.
It is the supposed murder of Colonel Barclay, of the Royal Mallows, at Aldershot, which I am investigating.
Having gathered these facts, Watson, I smoked several pipes over them, trying to separate those which were crucial from others which were merely incidental.
There could be no question that the most distinctive and suggestive point in the case was the singular disappearance of the door-key.
A most careful search had failed to discover it in the room. Therefore it must have been taken from it.
But neither the Colonel nor the Colonel's wife could have taken it. That was perfectly clear. Therefore a third person must have entered the room.
And that third person could only have come in through the window. It seemed to me that a careful examination of the room and the lawn might possibly reveal some traces of this mysterious individual.
You know my methods, Watson. There was not one of them which I did not apply to the inquiry. And it ended by my discovering traces, but very different ones from those which I had expected.
He had apparently rushed across the lawn, for his toe-marks were much deeper than his heels. But it was not the man who surprised me.
Holmes pulled a large sheet of tissue-paper out of his pocket and carefully unfolded it upon his knee.
The paper was covered with the tracings of the footmarks of some small animal. It had five well-marked footpads, an indication of long nails, and the whole print might be nearly as large as a dessert-spoon.
Did you ever hear of a dog running up a curtain? I found distinct traces that this creature had done so.
Neither dog nor cat nor monkey nor any creature that we are familiar with. I have tried to reconstruct it from the measurements.
Here are four prints where the beast has been standing motionless. You see that it is no less than fifteen inches from fore-foot to hind.
Add to that the length of neck and head, and you get a creature not much less than two feet long-probably more if there is any tail.
But now observe this other measurement. The animal has been moving, and we have the length of its stride.
In each case it is only about three inches. You have an indication, you see, of a long body with very short legs attached to it.
It has not been considerate enough to leave any of its hair behind it. But its general shape must be what I have indicated, and it can run up a curtain, and it is carnivorous.
Because it ran up the curtain. A canary's cage was hanging in the window, and its aim seems to have been to get at the bird.
Ah, if I could give it a name it might go a long way towards solving the case. On the whole, it was probably some creature of the weasel and stoat tribe-and yet it is larger than any of these that I have seen.
That, also, is still obscure. But we have learned a good deal, you perceive. We know that a man stood in the road looking at the quarrel between the Barclays-the blinds were up and the room lighted.
But really, Watson, I am keeping you up, and I might just as well tell you all this on our way to Aldershot to-morrow.
That is all very certain. But he is the only person in this world who can tell us exactly what happened in that room.
If you will be so good. If he can clear the matter up, well and good. If he refuses, we have no alternative but to apply for a warrant.
You may be sure that I took some precautions. I have one of my Baker Street boys mounting guard over him who would stick to him like a burr, go where he might.
We shall find him in Hudson Street to-morrow, Watson, and meanwhile I should be the criminal myself if I kept you out of bed any longer.
It was midday when we found ourselves at the scene of the tragedy, and, under my companion's guidance, we made our way at once to Hudson Street.
In spite of his capacity for concealing his emotions, I could easily see that Holmes was in a state of suppressed excitement, while I was myself tingling with that half-sporting, half-intellectual pleasure which I invariably experienced when I associated myself with him in his investigations.
"This is the street," said he, as we turned into a short thoroughfare lined with plain two-storied brick houses.
He looked suspiciously at us now out of yellow-shot, bilious eyes, and, without speaking or rising, he waved towards two chairs.
"Mr. Henry Wood, late of India, I believe," said Holmes, affably. "I've come over this little matter of Colonel Barclay's death."
That's what I want to ascertain. You know, I suppose, that unless the matter is cleared up, Mrs. Barclay, who is an old friend of yours, will in all probability be tried for murder.
"I don't know who you are," he cried, "nor how you come to know what you do know, but will you swear that this is true that you tell me?"
But when one gets old one has a longing for home. For years I've been dreaming of the bright green fields and the hedges of England.
At last I determined to see them before I died. I saved enough to bring me across, and then I came here where the soldiers are, for I know their ways and how to amuse them and so earn enough to keep me.
"Your narrative is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes. "I have already heard of your meeting with Mrs. Barclay, and your mutual recognition.
You then, as I understand, followed her home and saw through the window an altercation between her husband and her, in which she doubtless cast his conduct to you in his teeth.
I did, sir, and at the sight of me he looked as I have never seen a man look before, and over he went with his head on the fender.
But he was dead before he fell. I read death on his face as plain as I can read that text over the fire.
Then Nancy fainted, and I caught up the key of the door from her hand, intending to unlock it and get help.
But as I was doing it it seemed to me better to leave it alone and get away, for the thing might look black against me, and any way my secret would be out if I were taken.
In my haste I thrust the key into my pocket, and dropped my stick while I was chasing Teddy, who had run up the curtain.
The man leaned over and pulled up the front of a kind of hutch in the corner. In an instant out there slipped a beautiful reddish-brown creature, thin and lithe, with the legs of a stoat, a long, thin nose, and a pair of the finest red eyes that ever I saw in an animal's head.
Ah, there goes Major Murphy on the other side of the street. Good-by, Wood. I want to learn if anything has happened since yesterday.
The inquest is just over. The medical evidence showed conclusively that death was due to apoplexy. You see it was quite a simple case after all.
"Oh, remarkably superficial," said Holmes, smiling. "Come, Watson, I don't think we shall be wanted in Aldershot any more."
"There's one thing," said I, as we walked down to the station. "If the husband's name was James, and the other was Henry, what was this talk about David?"
That one word, my dear Watson, should have told me the whole story had I been the ideal reasoner which you are so fond of depicting.
Yes; David strayed a little occasionally, you know, and on one occasion in the same direction as Sergeant James Barclay.
You remember the small affair of Uriah and Bathsheba? My biblical knowledge is a trifle rusty, I fear, but you will find the story in the first or second of Samuel.
It may be that in the business of which I am now about to write the part which my friend played is not sufficiently accentuated; and yet the whole train of circumstances is so remarkable that I cannot bring myself to omit it entirely from this series.
Towards evening, however, the breaking of a test-tube brought his research to a premature ending, and he sprang up from his chair with an exclamation of impatience and a clouded brow.
"A day's work ruined, Watson," said he, striding across to the window. "Ha! the stars are out and the wind has fallen.
Holmes had shaken off his temporary ill-humour, and his characteristic talk, with its keen observance of detail and subtle power of inference held me amused and enthralled.
"Hum! A doctor's-general practitioner, I perceive," said Holmes. "Not been long in practice, but has had a good deal to do.
The light in our window above showed that this late visit was indeed intended for us. With some curiosity as to what could have sent a brother medico to us at such an hour, I followed Holmes into our sanctum.
His manner was nervous and shy, like that of a sensitive gentleman, and the thin white hand which he laid on the mantelpiece as he rose was that of an artist rather than of a surgeon.
His dress was quiet and sombre-a black frock-coat, dark trousers, and a touch of colour about his necktie.
"Good-evening, doctor," said Holmes, cheerily. "I am glad to see that you have only been waiting a very few minutes."
No, it was the candle on the side-table that told me. Pray resume your seat and let me know how I can serve you.
"I so seldom hear of the work that I thought it was quite dead," said he. "My publishers gave me a most discouraging account of its sale.
My own hobby has always been nervous disease. I should wish to make it an absolute specialty, but, of course, a man must take what he can get at first.
This, however, is beside the question, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and I quite appreciate how valuable your time is.
The fact is that a very singular train of events has occurred recently at my house in Brook Street, and to-night they came to such a head that I felt it was quite impossible for me to wait another hour before asking for your advice and assistance.
Sherlock Holmes sat down and lit his pipe. "You are very welcome to both," said he. "Pray let me have a detailed account of what the circumstances are which have disturbed you."
Mr. Blessington seemed more excited over the matter than I should have thought possible, though of course it was enough to disturb anybody's peace of mind.
If you would only come back with me in my brougham, you would at least be able to soothe him, though I can hardly hope that you will be able to explain this remarkable occurrence.
Sherlock Holmes had listened to this long narrative with an intentness which showed me that his interest was keenly aroused.
His face was as impassive as ever, but his lids had drooped more heavily over his eyes, and his smoke had curled up more thickly from his pipe to emphasize each curious episode in the doctor's tale.
As our visitor concluded, Holmes sprang up without a word, handed me my hat, picked his own from the table, and followed Dr. Trevelyan to the door.
Within a quarter of an hour we had been dropped at the door of the physician's residence in Brook Street, one of those sombre, flat-faced houses which one associates with a West-End practice.
But a singular interruption brought us to a standstill. The light at the top was suddenly whisked out, and from the darkness came a reedy, quivering voice.
"Oh, then it is you, doctor," said the voice, with a great heave of relief. "But those other gentlemen, are they what they pretend to be?"
"Yes, yes, it's all right," said the voice at last. "You can come up, and I am sorry if my precautions have annoyed you."
He relit the stair gas as he spoke, and we saw before us a singular-looking man, whose appearance, as well as his voice, testified to his jangled nerves.
He was very fat, but had apparently at some time been much fatter, so that the skin hung about his face in loose pouches, like the cheeks of a blood-hound.
He was of a sickly colour, and his thin, sandy hair seemed to bristle up with the intensity of his emotion.
"Good-evening, Mr. Holmes," said he. "I am sure I am very much obliged to you for coming round. No one ever needed your advice more than I do.
"Quite so," said Holmes. "Who are these two men Mr. Blessington, and why do they wish to molest you?"
"Well, well," said the resident patient, in a nervous fashion, "of course it is hard to say that. You can hardly expect me to answer that, Mr.
"You see that," said he, pointing to a big black box at the end of his bed. "I have never been a very rich man, Mr. Holmes-never made but one investment in my life, as Dr. Trevelyan would tell you.
But I don't believe in bankers. I would never trust a banker, Mr. Holmes. Between ourselves, what little I have is in that box, so you can understand what it means to me when unknown people force themselves into my rooms.
A minute later we were in the street and walking for home. We had crossed Oxford Street and were half way down Harley Street before I could get a word from my companion.
"Sorry to bring you out on such a fool's errand, Watson," he said at last. "It is an interesting case, too, at the bottom of it."
Well, it is quite evident that there are two men-more, perhaps, but at least two-who are determined for some reason to get at this fellow Blessington.
I have no doubt in my mind that both on the first and on the second occasion that young man penetrated to Blessington's room, while his confederate, by an ingenious device, kept the doctor from interfering.
A fraudulent imitation, Watson, though I should hardly dare to hint as much to our specialist. It is a very easy complaint to imitate.
It just happened, however, that this hour coincided with Blessington's constitutional, which seems to show that they were not very well acquainted with his daily routine.
Of course, if they had been merely after plunder they would at least have made some attempt to search for it.
I hold it, therefore, to be certain that he does know who these men are, and that for reasons of his own he suppresses it.
"Is there not one alternative," I suggested, "grotesquely improbable, no doubt, but still just conceivable?
Might the whole story of the cataleptic Russian and his son be a concoction of Dr. Trevelyan's, who has, for his own purposes, been in Blessington's rooms?
"My dear fellow," said he, "it was one of the first solutions which occurred to me, but I was soon able to corroborate the doctor's tale.
This young man has left prints upon the stair-carpet which made it quite superfluous for me to ask to see those which he had made in the room.
But we may sleep on it now, for I shall be surprised if we do not hear something further from Brook Street in the morning.
Sherlock Holmes's prophecy was soon fulfilled, and in a dramatic fashion. At half-past seven next morning, in the first glimmer of daylight, I found him standing by my bedside in his dressing-gown.
"Tragic, but ambiguous," said he, pulling up the blind. "Look at this-a sheet from a note-book, with 'For God's sake come at once-P.T.,' scrawled upon it in pencil.
Our friend, the doctor, was hard put to it when he wrote this. Come along, my dear fellow, for it's an urgent call.
In a quarter of an hour or so we were back at the physician's house. He came running out to meet us with a face of horror.
"I really hardly know what I am doing," he cried. "The police are already upstairs. It has shaken me most dreadfully."
He has a cup of tea taken in to him early every morning. When the maid entered, about seven, there the unfortunate fellow was hanging in the middle of the room.
He had tied his cord to the hook on which the heavy lamp used to hang, and he had jumped off from the top of the very box that he showed us yesterday.
It was a dreadful sight which met us as we entered the bedroom door. I have spoken of the impression of flabbiness which this man Blessington conveyed.
As he dangled from the hook it was exaggerated and intensified until he was scarce human in his appearance.
The neck was drawn out like a plucked chicken's, making the rest of him seem the more obese and unnatural by the contrast.
He was clad only in his long night-dress, and his swollen ankles and ungainly feet protruded starkly from beneath it.
"Good-morning, Lanner," answered Holmes; "you won't think me an intruder, I am sure. Have you heard of the events which led up to this affair?"
As far as I can see, the man has been driven out of his senses by fright. The bed has been well slept in, you see.
There's his impression deep enough. It's about five in the morning, you know, that suicides are most common.
"I should say that he has been dead about three hours, judging by the rigidity of the muscles," said I.
Found a screw-driver and some screws on the wash-hand stand. Seems to have smoked heavily during the night, too.
Oh, this is a Havana, and these others are cigars of the peculiar sort which are imported by the Dutch from their East Indian colonies.
They are usually wrapped in straw, you know, and are thinner for their length than any other brand." He picked up the four ends and examined them with his pocket-lens.
"Two of these have been smoked from a holder and two without," said he. "Two have been cut by a not very sharp knife, and two have had the ends bitten off by a set of excellent teeth.
I saw their traces. Excuse me a moment, and I may be able to give you some further information about it.
He went over to the door, and turning the lock he examined it in his methodical way. Then he took out the key, which was on the inside, and inspected that also.
The bed, the carpet, the chairs, the mantelpiece, the dead body, and the rope were each in turn examined, until at last he professed himself satisfied, and with my aid and that of the inspector cut down the wretched object and laid it reverently under a sheet.
"It is cut off this," said Dr. Trevelyan, drawing a large coil from under the bed. "He was morbidly nervous of fire, and always kept this beside him, so that he might escape by the window in case the stairs were burning."
"That must have saved them trouble," said Holmes, thoughtfully. "Yes, the actual facts are very plain, and I shall be surprised if by the afternoon I cannot give you the reasons for them as well.
I will take this photograph of Blessington, which I see upon the mantelpiece, as it may help me in my inquiries.
"Oh, there can be no doubt as to the sequence of events," said Holmes. "There were three of them in it: the young man, the old man, and a third, to whose identity I have no clue.
The first two, I need hardly remark, are the same who masqueraded as the Russian count and his son, so we can give a very full description of them.
They were admitted by a confederate inside the house. If I might offer you a word of advice, Inspector, it would be to arrest the page, who, as I understand, has only recently come into your service, Doctor.
"The young imp cannot be found," said Dr. Trevelyan; "the maid and the cook have just been searching for him."
"He has played a not unimportant part in this drama," said he. "The three men having ascended the stairs, which they did on tiptoe, the elder man first, the younger man second, and the unknown man in the rear-"
Well, it ended by their taking Blessington and hanging him. The matter was so prearranged that it is my belief that they brought with them some sort of block or pulley which might serve as a gallows.
That screw-driver and those screws were, as I conceive, for fixing it up. Seeing the hook, however they naturally saved themselves the trouble.
The inspector hurried away on the instant to make inquiries about the page, while Holmes and I returned to Baker Street for breakfast.
"I'll be back by three," said he, when we had finished our meal. "Both the inspector and the doctor will meet me here at that hour, and I hope by that time to have cleared up any little obscurity which the case may still present."
Our visitors arrived at the appointed time, but it was a quarter to four before my friend put in an appearance.
Well, at least I have got their identity. This so-called Blessington is, as I expected, well known at headquarters, and so are his assailants.
"You must surely remember the great Worthingdon bank business," said Holmes. "Five men were in it-these four and a fifth called Cartwright.
Tobin, the caretaker, was murdered, and the thieves got away with seven thousand pounds. This was in 1875.
They were all five arrested, but the evidence against them was by no means conclusive. This Blessington or Sutton, who was the worst of the gang, turned informer.
Twice they tried to get at him and failed; a third time, you see, it came off. Is there anything further which I can explain, Dr.
"I think you have made it all remarkably clear," said the doctor. "No doubt the day on which he was perturbed was the day when he had seen of their release in the newspapers."
Well, my dear sir, knowing the vindictive character of his old associates, he was trying to hide his own identity from everybody as long as he could.
His secret was a shameful one, and he could not bring himself to divulge it. However, wretch as he was, he was still living under the shield of British law, and I have no doubt, Inspector, that you will see that, though that shield may fail to guard, the sword of justice is still there to avenge.
Such were the singular circumstances in connection with the Resident Patient and the Brook Street Doctor.
The proceedings against the page broke down for want of evidence, and the Brook Street Mystery, as it was called, has never until now been fully dealt with in any public print.
During my long and intimate acquaintance with Mr. Sherlock Holmes I had never heard him refer to his relations, and hardly ever to his own early life.
I had come to believe that he was an orphan with no relatives living, but one day, to my very great surprise, he began to talk to me about his brother.
The point under discussion was, how far any singular gift in an individual was due to his ancestry and how far to his own early training.
"In your own case," said I, "from all that you have told me, it seems obvious that your faculty of observation and your peculiar facility for deduction are due to your own systematic training."
"To some extent," he answered, thoughtfully. "My ancestors were country squires, who appear to have led much the same life as is natural to their class.
But, none the less, my turn that way is in my veins, and may have come with my grandmother, who was the sister of Vernet, the French artist.
This was news to me indeed. If there were another man with such singular powers in England, how was it that neither police nor public had heard of him?
I put the question, with a hint that it was my companion's modesty which made him acknowledge his brother as his superior.
When I say, therefore, that Mycroft has better powers of observation than I, you may take it that I am speaking the exact and literal truth.
I had never heard of the institution, and my face must have proclaimed as much, for Sherlock Holmes pulled out his watch.
The Diogenes Club is the queerest club in London, and Mycroft one of the queerest men. He's always there from quarter to five to twenty to eight.
It's six now, so if you care for a stroll this beautiful evening I shall be very happy to introduce you to two curiosities.
"You wonder," said my companion, "why it is that Mycroft does not use his powers for detective work. He is incapable of it."
But he has no ambition and no energy. He will not even go out of his way to verify his own solutions, and would rather be considered wrong than take the trouble to prove himself right.
Again and again I have taken a problem to him, and have received an explanation which has afterwards proved to be the correct one.
And yet he was absolutely incapable of working out the practical points which must be gone into before a case could be laid before a judge or jury.
By no means. What is to me a means of livelihood is to him the merest hobby of a dilettante. He has an extraordinary faculty for figures, and audits the books in some of the government departments.
Mycroft lodges in Pall Mall, and he walks round the corner into Whitehall every morning and back every evening.
From year's end to year's end he takes no other exercise, and is seen nowhere else, except only in the Diogenes Club, which is just opposite his rooms.
Very likely not. There are many men in London, you know, who, some from shyness, some from misanthropy, have no wish for the company of their fellows.
Through the glass paneling I caught a glimpse of a large and luxurious room, in which a considerable number of men were sitting about and reading papers, each in his own little nook.
Holmes showed me into a small chamber which looked out into Pall Mall, and then, leaving me for a minute, he came back with a companion whom I knew could only be his brother.
His eyes, which were of a peculiarly light, watery grey, seemed to always retain that far-away, introspective look which I had only observed in Sherlock's when he was exerting his full powers.
"I am glad to meet you, sir," said he, putting out a broad, fat hand like the flipper of a seal. "I hear of Sherlock everywhere since you became his chronicler.
By the way, Sherlock, I expected to see you round last week, to consult me over that Manor House case.
"I was sure of it from the first." The two sat down together in the bow-window of the club. "To any one who wishes to study mankind this is the spot," said Mycroft.
The two men had stopped opposite the window. Some chalk marks over the waistcoat pocket were the only signs of billiards which I could see in one of them.
The other was a very small, dark fellow, with his hat pushed back and several packages under his arm.
"Surely," answered Holmes, "it is not hard to say that a man with that bearing, expression of authority, and sunbaked skin, is a soldier, is more than a private, and is not long from India."
"That he has not left the service long is shown by his still wearing his ammunition boots, as they are called," observed Mycroft.
He had not the cavalry stride, yet he wore his hat on one side, as is shown by the lighter skin of that side of his brow.
Then, of course, his complete mourning shows that he has lost some one very dear. The fact that he is doing his own shopping looks as though it were his wife.
He has been buying things for children, you perceive. There is a rattle, which shows that one of them is very young.
The wife probably died in childbed. The fact that he has a picture-book under his arm shows that there is another child to be thought of.
I began to understand what my friend meant when he said that his brother possessed even keener faculties that he did himself.
He glanced across at me and smiled. Mycroft took snuff from a tortoise-shell box, and brushed away the wandering grains from his coat front with a large, red silk handkerchief.
"By the way, Sherlock," said he, "I have had something quite after your own heart-a most singular problem-submitted to my judgment.
I really had not the energy to follow it up save in a very incomplete fashion, but it gave me a basis for some pleasing speculation.
The brother scribbled a note upon a leaf of his pocket-book, and, ringing the bell, he handed it to the waiter.
"I have asked Mr. Melas to step across," said he. "He lodges on the floor above me, and I have some slight acquaintance with him, which led him to come to me in his perplexity.
A few minutes later we were joined by a short, stout man whose olive face and coal-black hair proclaimed his Southern origin, though his speech was that of an educated Englishman.
He shook hands eagerly with Sherlock Holmes, and his dark eyes sparkled with pleasure when he understood that the specialist was anxious to hear his story.
"I do not believe that the police credit me-on my word, I do not," said he in a wailing voice. "Just because they have never heard of it before, they think that such a thing cannot be.
But I know that I shall never be easy in my mind until I know what has become of my poor man with the sticking-plaster upon his face.
He spoke in a nervous, jerky fashion, and with little giggling laughs in between, but somehow he impressed me with fear more than the other.
'There are five sovereigns here,' said he, walking up to me, 'which will, I hope, be a sufficient fee.
But remember,' he added, tapping me lightly on the chest and giggling, 'if you speak to a human soul about this-one human soul, mind-well, may God have mercy upon your soul!
So that was the end of my adventure, Mr. Holmes. I do not know where I was, nor whom I spoke with, nor anything save what I have told you.
But I know that there is foul play going on, and I want to help that unhappy man if I can. I told the whole story to Mr. Mycroft Holmes next morning, and subsequently to the police.
We all sat in silence for some little time after listening to this extraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock looked across at his brother.
'Anybody supplying any information to the whereabouts of a Greek gentleman named Paul Kratides, from Athens, who is unable to speak English, will be rewarded.
A similar reward paid to any one giving information about a Greek lady whose first name is Sophy. X 2473.'
"Sherlock has all the energy of the family," said Mycroft, turning to me. "Well, you take the case up by all means, and let me know if you do any good."
"Certainly," answered my friend, rising from his chair. "I'll let you know, and Mr. Melas also. In the meantime, Mr. Melas, I should certainly be on my guard, if I were you, for of course they must know through these advertisements that you have betrayed them."
"You see, Watson," he remarked, "our evening has been by no means wasted. Some of my most interesting cases have come to me in this way through Mycroft.
The problem which we have just listened to, although it can admit of but one explanation, has still some distinguishing features.
Well, knowing as much as we do, it will be singular indeed if we fail to discover the rest. You must yourself have formed some theory which will explain the facts to which we have listened.
It seemed to me to be obvious that this Greek girl had been carried off by the young Englishman named Harold Latimer.
Sherlock Holmes shook his head. "This young man could not talk a word of Greek. The lady could talk English fairly well.
Well, then, we will presume that she had come on a visit to England, and that this Harold had persuaded her to fly with him.
Then the brother-for that, I fancy, must be the relationship-comes over from Greece to interfere. He imprudently puts himself into the power of the young man and his older associate.
They seize him and use violence towards him in order to make him sign some papers to make over the girl's fortune-of which he may be trustee-to them.
This he refuses to do. In order to negotiate with him they have to get an interpreter, and they pitch upon this Mr. Melas, having used some other one before.
"Excellent, Watson!" cried Holmes. "I really fancy that you are not far from the truth. You see that we hold all the cards, and we have only to fear some sudden act of violence on their part.
Well, if our conjecture is correct and the girl's name is or was Sophy Kratides, we should have no difficulty in tracing her.
If they have been living in the same place during this time, it is probable that we shall have some answer to Mycroft's advertisement.
We had reached our house in Baker Street while we had been talking. Holmes ascended the stair first, and as he opened the door of our room he gave a start of surprise.
Looking over his shoulder, I was equally astonished. His brother Mycroft was sitting smoking in the armchair.
"Come in, Sherlock! Come in, sir," said he blandly, smiling at our surprised faces. "You don't expect such energy from me, do you, Sherlock?
"He writes from Lower Brixton," said Mycroft Holmes. "Do you not think that we might drive to him now, Sherlock, and learn these particulars?"
My dear Mycroft, the brother's life is more valuable than the sister's story. I think we should call at Scotland Yard for Inspector Gregson, and go straight out to Beckenham.
"Excellent," said Sherlock Holmes. "Send the boy for a four-wheeler, and we shall be off at once." He opened the table-drawer as he spoke, and I noticed that he slipped his revolver into his pocket.
"Yes," said he, in answer to my glance; "I should say from what we have heard, that we are dealing with a particularly dangerous gang."
It was almost dark before we found ourselves in Pall Mall, at the rooms of Mr. Melas. A gentleman had just called for him, and he was gone.
"I don't know, sir," answered the woman who had opened the door; "I only know that he drove away with the gentleman in a carriage."
Oh, no, sir. He was a little gentleman, with glasses, thin in the face, but very pleasant in his ways, for he was laughing all the time that he was talking.
"Come along!" cried Sherlock Holmes, abruptly. "This grows serious," he observed, as we drove to Scotland Yard.
These men have got hold of Melas again. He is a man of no physical courage, as they are well aware from their experience the other night.
This villain was able to terrorise him the instant that he got into his presence. No doubt they want his professional services, but, having used him, they may be inclined to punish him for what they will regard as his treachery.
It was a quarter to ten before we reached London Bridge, and half past before the four of us alighted on the Beckenham platform.
A drive of half a mile brought us to The Myrtles-a large, dark house standing back from the road in its own grounds.
The inspector laughed. "I saw the wheel-tracks in the light of the gate-lamp, but where does the luggage come in?"
You may have observed the same wheel-tracks going the other way. But the outward-bound ones were very much deeper-so much so that we can say for a certainty that there was a very considerable weight on the carriage.
"You get a trifle beyond me there," said the inspector, shrugging his shoulder. "It will not be an easy door to force, but we will try if we cannot make some one hear us."
He hammered loudly at the knocker and pulled at the bell, but without any success. Holmes had slipped away, but he came back in a few minutes.
"It is a mercy that you are on the side of the force, and not against it, Mr. Holmes," remarked the inspector, as he noted the clever way in which my friend had forced back the catch.
One after the other we made our way into a large apartment, which was evidently that in which Mr. Melas had found himself.
The inspector had lit his lantern, and by its light we could see the two doors, the curtain, the lamp, and the suit of Japanese mail as he had described them.
We all stood still and listened. A low moaning sound was coming from somewhere over our heads. Holmes rushed to the door and out into the hall.
The dismal noise came from upstairs. He dashed up, the inspector and I at his heels, while his brother Mycroft followed as quickly as his great bulk would permit.
Three doors faced up upon the second floor, and it was from the central of these that the sinister sounds were issuing, sinking sometimes into a dull mumble and rising again into a shrill whine.
It was locked, but the key had been left on the outside. Holmes flung open the door and rushed in, but he was out again in an instant, with his hand to his throat.
Peering in, we could see that the only light in the room came from a dull blue flame which flickered from a small brass tripod in the centre.
It threw a livid, unnatural circle upon the floor, while in the shadows beyond we saw the vague loom of two figures which crouched against the wall.
From the open door there reeked a horrible poisonous exhalation which set us gasping and coughing. Holmes rushed to the top of the stairs to draw in the fresh air, and then, dashing into the room, he threw up the window and hurled the brazen tripod out into the garden.
"We can enter in a minute," he gasped, darting out again. "Where is a candle? I doubt if we could strike a match in that atmosphere.
With a rush we got to the poisoned men and dragged them out into the well-lit hall. Both of them were blue-lipped and insensible, with swollen, congested faces and protruding eyes.
His hands and feet were securely strapped together, and he bore over one eye the marks of a violent blow.
The other, who was secured in a similar fashion, was a tall man in the last stage of emaciation, with several strips of sticking-plaster arranged in a grotesque pattern over his face.
He had ceased to moan as we laid him down, and a glance showed me that for him at least our aid had come too late.
Mr. Melas, however, still lived, and in less than an hour, with the aid of ammonia and brandy I had the satisfaction of seeing him open his eyes, and of knowing that my hand had drawn him back from that dark valley in which all paths meet.
Indeed, it was almost mesmeric, the effect which this giggling ruffian had produced upon the unfortunate linguist, for he could not speak of him save with trembling hands and a blanched cheek.
Finally, finding him proof against every threat, they had hurled him back into his prison, and after reproaching Melas with his treachery, which appeared from the newspaper advertisement, they had stunned him with a blow from a stick, and he remembered nothing more until he found us bending over him.
And this was the singular case of the Grecian Interpreter, the explanation of which is still involved in some mystery.
While there she had met a young man named Harold Latimer, who had acquired an ascendancy over her and had eventually persuaded her to fly with him.
Her friends, shocked at the event, had contented themselves with informing her brother at Athens, and had then washed their hands of the matter.
The brother, on his arrival in England, had imprudently placed himself in the power of Latimer and of his associate, whose name was Wilson Kemp-a man of the foulest antecedents.
They had kept him in the house without the girl's knowledge, and the plaster over the face had been for the purpose of making recognition difficult in case she should ever catch a glimpse of him.
Her feminine perception, however, had instantly seen through the disguise when, on the occasion of the interpreter's visit, she had seen him for the first time.
The poor girl, however, was herself a prisoner, for there was no one about the house except the man who acted as coachman, and his wife, both of whom were tools of the conspirators.
Finding that their secret was out, and that their prisoner was not to be coerced, the two villains with the girl had fled away at a few hours' notice from the furnished house which they had hired, having first, as they thought, taken vengeance both upon the man who had defied and the one who had betrayed them.
Months afterwards a curious newspaper cutting reached us from Buda-Pesth. It told how two Englishmen who had been traveling with a woman had met with a tragic end.
They had each been stabbed, it seems, and the Hungarian police were of opinion that they had quarreled and had inflicted mortal injuries upon each other.
Holmes, however, is, I fancy, of a different way of thinking, and holds to this day that, if one could find the Grecian girl, one might learn how the wrongs of herself and her brother came to be avenged.
The July which immediately succeeded my marriage was made memorable by three cases of interest, in which I had the privilege of being associated with Sherlock Holmes and of studying his methods.
I find them recorded in my notes under the headings of "The Adventure of the Second Stain," "The Adventure of the Naval Treaty," and "The Adventure of the Tired Captain."
The first of these, however, deals with interest of such importance and implicates so many of the first families in the kingdom that for many years it will be impossible to make it public.
No case, however, in which Holmes was engaged has ever illustrated the value of his analytical methods so clearly or has impressed those who were associated with him so deeply.
The new century will have come, however, before the story can be safely told. Meanwhile I pass on to the second on my list, which promised also at one time to be of national importance, and was marked by several incidents which give it a quite unique character.
During my school-days I had been intimately associated with a lad named Percy Phelps, who was of much the same age as myself, though he was two classes ahead of me.
This gaudy relationship did him little good at school. On the contrary, it seemed rather a piquant thing to us to chevy him about the playground and hit him over the shins with a wicket.
But it was another thing when he came out into the world. I heard vaguely that his abilities and the influences which he commanded had won him a good position at the Foreign Office, and then he passed completely out of my mind until the following letter recalled his existence:
Briarbrae, Woking. My dear Watson,-I have no doubt that you can remember "Tadpole" Phelps, who was in the fifth form when you were in the third.
There is no use writing of the details of that dreadful event. In the event of your acceding to my request it is probable that I shall have to narrate them to you.
I have only just recovered from nine weeks of brain-fever, and am still exceedingly weak. Do you think that you could bring your friend Mr. Holmes down to see me?
I should like to have his opinion of the case, though the authorities assure me that nothing more can be done.
Do try to bring him down, and as soon as possible. Every minute seems an hour while I live in this state of horrible suspense.
Assure him that if I have not asked his advice sooner it was not because I did not appreciate his talents, but because I have been off my head ever since the blow fell.
Now I am clear again, though I dare not think of it too much for fear of a relapse. I am still so weak that I have to write, as you see, by dictating.
There was something that touched me as I read this letter, something pitiable in the reiterated appeals to bring Holmes.
My wife agreed with me that not a moment should be lost in laying the matter before him, and so within an hour of breakfast-time I found myself back once more in the old rooms in Baker Street.
Holmes was seated at his side-table clad in his dressing-gown, and working hard over a chemical investigation.
A large curved retort was boiling furiously in the bluish flame of a Bunsen burner, and the distilled drops were condensing into a two-litre measure.
My friend hardly glanced up as I entered, and I, seeing that his investigation must be of importance, seated myself in an armchair and waited.
He dipped into this bottle or that, drawing out a few drops of each with his glass pipette, and finally brought a test-tube containing a solution over to the table.
"You come at a crisis, Watson," said he. "If this paper remains blue, all is well. If it turns red, it means a man's life."
He dipped it into the test-tube and it flushed at once into a dull, dirty crimson. "Hum! I thought as much!"
He turned to his desk and scribbled off several telegrams, which were handed over to the page-boy. Then he threw himself down into the chair opposite, and drew up his knees until his fingers clasped round his long, thin shins.
"A very commonplace little murder," said he. "You've got something better, I fancy. You are the stormy petrel of crime, Watson.
My interest is already awakened in the case. If you are ready we will start at once for Woking, and see this diplomatist who is in such evil case, and the lady to whom he dictates his letters.
We were fortunate enough to catch an early train at Waterloo, and in a little under an hour we found ourselves among the fir-woods and the heather of Woking.
Briarbrae proved to be a large detached house standing in extensive grounds within a few minutes' walk of the station.
On sending in our cards we were shown into an elegantly appointed drawing-room, where we were joined in a few minutes by a rather stout man who received us with much hospitality.
His age may have been nearer forty than thirty, but his cheeks were so ruddy and his eyes so merry that he still conveyed the impression of a plump and mischievous boy.
"I am so glad that you have come," said he, shaking our hands with effusion. "Percy has been inquiring for you all morning.
Ah, poor old chap, he clings to any straw! His father and his mother asked me to see you, for the mere mention of the subject is very painful to them.
"We have had no details yet," observed Holmes. "I perceive that you are not yourself a member of the family."
"Of course you saw the 'J.H.' monogram on my locket," said he. "For a moment I thought you had done something clever.
Joseph Harrison is my name, and as Percy is to marry my sister Annie I shall at least be a relation by marriage.
You will find my sister in his room, for she has nursed him hand-and-foot this two months back. Perhaps we'd better go in at once, for I know how impatient he is.
The chamber in which we were shown was on the same floor as the drawing-room. It was furnished partly as a sitting and partly as a bedroom, with flowers arranged daintily in every nook and corner.
A young man, very pale and worn, was lying upon a sofa near the open window, through which came the rich scent of the garden and the balmy summer air.
He clutched her hand to detain her. "How are you, Watson?" said he, cordially. "I should never have known you under that moustache, and I daresay you would not be prepared to swear to me.
I introduced him in a few words, and we both sat down. The stout young man had left us, but his sister still remained with her hand in that of the invalid.
She was a striking-looking woman, a little short and thick for symmetry, but with a beautiful olive complexion, large, dark, Italian eyes, and a wealth of deep black hair.
I wrote two more articles and then, feeling more drowsy than ever, I rose and walked up and down the room to stretch my legs.
My coffee had not yet come, and I wondered what the cause of the delay could be. Opening the door, I started down the corridor to find out.
There was a straight passage, dimly lighted, which led from the room in which I had been working, and was the only exit from it.
It ended in a curving staircase, with the commissionnaire's lodge in the passage at the bottom. Half-way down this staircase is a small landing, with another passage running into it at right angles.
This second one leads by means of a second small stair to a side door, used by servants, and also as a short cut by clerks when coming from Charles Street.
A cold hand seemed to close round my heart. Some one, then, was in that room where my precious treaty lay upon the table.
I ran frantically up the stairs and along the passage. There was no one in the corridors, Mr. Holmes.
There was no one in the room. All was exactly as I left it, save only that the papers which had been committed to my care had been taken from the desk on which they lay.
Holmes sat up in his chair and rubbed his hands. I could see that the problem was entirely to his heart.
I recognised in an instant that the thief must have come up the stairs from the side door. Of course I must have met him if he had come the other way.
You were satisfied that he could not have been concealed in the room all the time, or in the corridor which you have just described as dimly lighted?
It is absolutely impossible. A rat could not conceal himself either in the room or the corridor. There is no cover at all.
The commissionnaire, seeing by my pale face that something was to be feared, had followed me upstairs.
Now we both rushed along the corridor and down the steep steps which led to Charles Street. The door at the bottom was closed, but unlocked.
We flung it open and rushed out. I can distinctly remember that as we did so there came three chimes from a neighbouring clock.
How is it, then, that the woman who came into the room about nine left no traces with her muddy boots?
I am glad you raised the point. It occurred to me at the time. The charwomen are in the habit of taking off their boots at the commissionnaire's office, and putting on list slippers.
We examined the room also. There is no possibility of a secret door, and the windows are quite thirty feet from the ground.
Both of them were fastened on the inside. The carpet prevents any possibility of a trap-door, and the ceiling is of the ordinary whitewashed kind.
They use none. There is a stove. The bell-rope hangs from the wire just to the right of my desk. Whoever rang it must have come right up to the desk to do it.
Certainly the incident was unusual. What were your next steps? You examined the room, I presume, to see if the intruder had left any traces-any cigar-end or dropped glove or hairpin or other trifle?
You can imagine the state of things here when they were roused from their beds by the doctor's ringing and found me in this condition.
It was evident to all that I was in for a long illness, so Joseph was bundled out of this cheery bedroom, and it was turned into a sick-room for me.
Here I have lain, Mr. Holmes, for over nine weeks, unconscious, and raving with brain-fever. If it had not been for Miss Harrison here and for the doctor's care I should not be speaking to you now.
She has nursed me by day and a hired nurse has looked after me by night, for in my mad fits I was capable of anything.
Slowly my reason has cleared, but it is only during the last three days that my memory has quite returned.
Sometimes I wish that it never had. The first thing that I did was to wire to Mr. Forbes, who had the case in hand.
He came out, and assures me that, though everything has been done, no trace of a clue has been discovered.
The commissionnaire and his wife have been examined in every way without any light being thrown upon the matter.
The suspicions of the police then rested upon young Gorot, who, as you may remember, stayed over time in the office that night.
Nothing was found to implicate him in any way, and there the matter dropped. I turn to you, Mr. Holmes, as absolutely my last hope.
The invalid sank back upon his cushions, tired out by this long recital, while his nurse poured him out a glass of some stimulating medicine.
Holmes sat silently, with his head thrown back and his eyes closed, in an attitude which might seem listless to a stranger, but which I knew betokened the most intense self-absorption.
"You statement has been so explicit," said he at last, "that you have really left me very few questions to ask.
There is one of the very utmost importance, however. Did you tell any one that you had this special task to perform?
Thank you. I have no doubt I can get details from Forbes. The authorities are excellent at amassing facts, though they do not always use them to advantage.
He walked past the couch to the open window, and held up the drooping stalk of a moss-rose, looking down at the dainty blend of crimson and green.
It was a new phase of his character to me, for I had never before seen him show any keen interest in natural objects.
"There is nothing in which deduction is so necessary as in religion," said he, leaning with his back against the shutters.
It can be built up as an exact science by the reasoner. Our highest assurance of the goodness of Providence seems to me to rest in the flowers.
All other things, our powers our desires, our food, are all really necessary for our existence in the first instance.
But this rose is an extra. Its smell and its colour are an embellishment of life, not a condition of it.
It is only goodness which gives extras, and so I say again that we have much to hope from the flowers.
Percy Phelps and his nurse looked at Holmes during this demonstration with surprise and a good deal of disappointment written upon their faces.
He had fallen into a reverie, with the moss-rose between his fingers. It had lasted some minutes before the young lady broke in upon it.
"Do you see any prospect of solving this mystery, Mr. Holmes?" she asked, with a touch of asperity in her voice.
"Oh, the mystery!" he answered, coming back with a start to the realities of life. "Well, it would be absurd to deny that the case is a very abstruse and complicated one, but I can promise you that I will look into the matter and let you know any points which may strike me."
You have furnished me with seven, but, of course, I must test them before I can pronounce upon their value.
"Your advice is very excellent, Miss Harrison," said Holmes, rising. "I think, Watson, we cannot do better.
Well, I'll come out by the same train to-morrow, though it's more than likely that my report will be a negative one.
"God bless you for promising to come," cried our client. "It gives me fresh life to know that something is being done.
He was cold, but not harsh. I daresay my severe illness prevented him from being that. He repeated that the matter was of the utmost importance, and added that no steps would be taken about my future-by which he means, of course, my dismissal-until my health was restored and I had an opportunity of repairing my misfortune.
"Well, that was reasonable and considerate," said Holmes. "Come, Watson, for we have a good day's work before us in town."
Mr. Joseph Harrison drove us down to the station, and we were soon whirling up in a Portsmouth train.
Holmes was sunk in profound thought, and hardly opened his mouth until we had passed Clapham Junction.
It's a very cheery thing to come into London by any of these lines which run high, and allow you to look down upon the houses like this.
Look at those big, isolated clumps of building rising up above the slates, like brick islands in a lead-coloured sea.
Light-houses, my boy! Beacons of the future! Capsules with hundreds of bright little seeds in each, out of which will spring the wise, better England of the future.
Yes, but she is a good sort, or I am mistaken. She and her brother are the only children of an iron-master somewhere up Northumberland way.
He got engaged to her when traveling last winter, and she came down to be introduced to his people, with her brother as escort.
Then came the smash, and she stayed on to nurse her lover, while brother Joseph, finding himself pretty snug, stayed on too.
I was going to say that my practice could get along very well for a day or two, since it is the slackest time in the year.
"Excellent," said he, recovering his good-humour. "Then we'll look into this matter together. I think that we should begin by seeing Forbes.
He can probably tell us all the details we want until we know from what side the case is to be approached.
Well, we have several, but we can only test their value by further inquiry. The most difficult crime to track is the one which is purposeless.
Well, it is just conceivable that a statesman might find himself in a position where he was not sorry to have such a document accidentally destroyed.
It is a possibility and we cannot afford to disregard it. We shall see the noble lord to-day and find out if he can tell us anything.
Yes, I sent wires from Woking station to every evening paper in London. This advertisement will appear in each of them.
If not, there is no harm done. But if Mr. Phelps is correct in stating that there is no hiding-place either in the room or the corridors, then the person must have come from outside.
That is one of the clues of which I spoke. It may lead us to something. And then, of course, there is the bell-which is the most distinctive feature of the case.
Why should the bell ring? Was it the thief who did it out of bravado? Or was it some one who was with the thief who did it in order to prevent the crime?
Or was it an accident? Or was it-?" He sank back into the state of intense and silent thought from which he had emerged; but it seemed to me, accustomed as I was to his every mood, that some new possibility had dawned suddenly upon him.
It was twenty past three when we reached our terminus, and after a hasty luncheon at the buffet we pushed on at once to Scotland Yard.
Holmes had already wired to Forbes, and we found him waiting to receive us-a small, foxy man with a sharp but by no means amiable expression.
He was decidedly frigid in his manner to us, especially when he heard the errand upon which we had come.
"I've heard of your methods before now, Mr. Holmes," said he, tartly. "You are ready enough to use all the information that the police can lay at your disposal, and then you try to finish the case yourself and bring discredit on them."
"On the contrary," said Holmes, "out of my last fifty-three cases my name has only appeared in four, and the police have had all the credit in forty-nine.
I don't blame you for not knowing this, for you are young and inexperienced, but if you wish to get on in your new duties you will work with me and not against me.
"I'd be very glad of a hint or two," said the detective, changing his manner. "I've certainly had no credit from the case so far."
Tangey, the commissionnaire, has been shadowed. He left the Guards with a good character and we can find nothing against him.
We have set one of our women on to her. Mrs. Tangey drinks, and our woman has been with her twice when she was well on, but she could get nothing out of her.
Well, certainly that would agree with his being found a little later asleep in his chair. There is nothing against them then but the woman's character.
Did you ask her why she hurried away that night? Her haste attracted the attention of the police constable.
Did you point out to her that you and Mr. Phelps, who started at least twenty minutes after her, got home before her?
She has at least an answer for everything. Did you ask her whether in leaving she met any one or saw any one loitering about Charles Street?
The clerk Gorot has been shadowed all these nine weeks, but without result. We can show nothing against him.
Well, I must confess that it beats me. It was a cool hand, whoever it was, to go and give the alarm like that.
Yes, it was a queer thing to do. Many thanks to you for what you have told me. If I can put the man into your hands you shall hear from me.
The statesman received us with that old-fashioned courtesy for which he is remarkable, and seated us on the two luxuriant lounges on either side of the fireplace.
Standing on the rug between us, with his slight, tall figure, his sharp features, thoughtful face, and curling hair prematurely tinged with grey, he seemed to represent that not too common type, a nobleman who is in truth noble.
"Your name is very familiar to me, Mr. Holmes," said he, smiling. "And, of course, I cannot pretend to be ignorant of the object of your visit.
There has only been one occurrence in these offices which could call for your attention. In whose interest are you acting, may I ask?
Ah, my unfortunate nephew! You can understand that our kinship makes it the more impossible for me to screen him in any way.
Well, since you never said so, and Mr. Phelps never said so, and nobody else knew anything of the matter, then the thief's presence in the room was purely accidental.
Holmes considered for a moment. "There is another very important point which I wish to discuss with you," said he.
You feared, as I understand, that very grave results might follow from the details of this treaty becoming known.
If the treaty had reached, let us say, the French or Russian Foreign Office, you would expect to hear of it?
Since nearly ten weeks have elapsed, then, and nothing has been heard, it is not unfair to suppose that for some reason the treaty has not reached them.
We can hardly suppose, Mr. Holmes, that the thief took the treaty in order to frame it and hang it up.
If he waits a little longer he will get no price at all. The treaty will cease to be secret in a few months.
"That is most important," said Holmes. "Of course, it is a possible supposition that the thief has had a sudden illness-"
"Every success to your investigation, be the criminal who it may," answered the nobleman, as he bowed us out the door.
"He's a fine fellow," said Holmes, as we came out into Whitehall. "But he has a struggle to keep up his position.
He is far from rich and has many calls. You noticed, of course, that his boots had been resoled. Now, Watson, I won't detain you from your legitimate work any longer.
I shall do nothing more to-day, unless I have an answer to my cab advertisement. But I should be extremely obliged to you if you would come down with me to Woking to-morrow, by the same train which we took yesterday.
I met him accordingly next morning and we travelled down to Woking together. He had had no answer to his advertisement, he said, and no fresh light had been thrown upon the case.
He had, when he so willed it, the utter immobility of countenance of a red Indian, and I could not gather from his appearance whether he was satisfied or not with the position of the case.
His conversation, I remember, was about the Bertillon system of measurements, and he expressed his enthusiastic admiration of the French savant.
We found our client still under the charge of his devoted nurse, but looking considerably better than before.
"My report, as I expected, is a negative one," said Holmes. "I have seen Forbes, and I have seen your uncle, and I have set one or two trains of inquiry upon foot which may lead to something."
"God bless you for saying that!" cried Miss Harrison. "If we keep our courage and our patience the truth must come out."
Yes, we have had an adventure during the night, and one which might have proved to be a serious one.
His expression grew very grave as he spoke, and a look of something akin to fear sprang up in his eyes.
"Do you know," said he, "that I begin to believe that I am the unconscious centre of some monstrous conspiracy, and that my life is aimed at as well as my honour?"
It sounds incredible, for I have not, as far as I know, an enemy in the world. Yet from last night's experience I can come to no other conclusion.
There was a pause then for about ten minutes, as if the person were waiting to see whether the noise had awakened me.
Then I heard a gentle creaking as the window was very slowly opened. I could stand it no longer, for my nerves are not what they used to be.
I sprang out of bed and flung open the shutters. A man was crouching at the window. I could see little of him, for he was gone like a flash.
He was wrapped in some sort of cloak which came across the lower part of his face. One thing only I am sure of, and that is that he had some weapon in his hand.
I should have followed him through the open window if I had been stronger. As it was, I rang the bell and roused the house.
It took me some little time, for the bell rings in the kitchen and the servants all sleep upstairs. I shouted, however, and that brought Joseph down, and he roused the others.
Joseph and the groom found marks on the bed outside the window, but the weather has been so dry lately that they found it hopeless to follow the trail across the grass.
There's a place, however, on the wooden fence which skirts the road which shows signs, they tell me, as if some one had got over, and had snapped the top of the rail in doing so.
This tale of our client's appeared to have an extraordinary effect upon Sherlock Holmes. He rose from his chair and paced about the room in uncontrollable excitement.
"Misfortunes never come single," said Phelps, smiling, though it was evident that his adventure had somewhat shaken him.
"You have certainly had your share," said Holmes. "Do you think you could walk round the house with me?"
"I am afraid not," said Holmes, shaking his head. "I think I must ask you to remain sitting exactly where you are."
The young lady resumed her seat with an air of displeasure. Her brother, however, had joined us and we set off all four together.
We passed round the lawn to the outside of the young diplomatist's window. There were, as he had said, marks upon the bed, but they were hopelessly blurred and vague.
"I don't think any one could make much of this," said he. "Let us go round the house and see why this particular room was chosen by the burglar.
I should have thought those larger windows of the drawing-room and dining-room would have had more attractions for him.
Holmes strolled round the house with his hands in his pockets and a negligent air which was unusual with him.
"By the way," said he to Joseph Harrison, "you found some place, I understand, where the fellow scaled the fence.
The plump young man led us to a spot where the top of one of the wooden rails had been cracked. A small fragment of the wood was hanging down.
There are no marks of any one jumping down upon the other side. No, I fancy we shall get no help here.
Percy Phelps was walking very slowly, leaning upon the arm of his future brother-in-law. Holmes walked swiftly across the lawn, and we were at the open window of the bedroom long before the others came up.
"Miss Harrison," said Holmes, speaking with the utmost intensity of manner, "you must stay where you are all day.
Well, in investigating this minor affair we must not lose sight of our main inquiry. It would be a very great help to me if you would come up to London with us.
Then, if my friend of the night comes to revisit me, he will find the bird flown. We are all in your hands, Mr. Holmes, and you must tell us exactly what you would like done.
Oh, no; my friend Watson is a medical man, you know, and he'll look after you. We'll have our lunch here, if you will permit us, and then we shall all three set off for town together.
It was arranged as he suggested, though Miss Harrison excused herself from leaving the bedroom, in accordance with Holmes's suggestion.
Holmes had a still more startling surprise for us, however, for, after accompanying us down to the station and seeing us into our carriage, he calmly announced that he had no intention of leaving Woking.
"There are one or two small points which I should desire to clear up before I go," said he. "Your absence, Mr. Phelps, will in some ways rather assist me.
Watson, when you reach London you would oblige me by driving at once to Baker Street with our friend here, and remaining with him until I see you again.
It is fortunate that you are old schoolfellows, as you must have much to talk over. Mr. Phelps can have the spare bedroom to-night, and I will be with you in time for breakfast, for there is a train which will take me into Waterloo at eight.
"You might tell them at Briarbrae that I hope to be back to-morrow night," cried Phelps, as we began to move from the platform.
"I hardly expect to go back to Briarbrae," answered Holmes, and waved his hand to us cheerily as we shot out from the station.
Phelps and I talked it over on our journey, but neither of us could devise a satisfactory reason for this new development.
I suppose he wants to find out some clue as to the burglary last night, if a burglar it was. For myself, I don't believe it was an ordinary thief.
It sounds high-flown and absurd, but consider the facts! Why should a thief try to break in at a bedroom window, where there could be no hope of any plunder, and why should he come with a long knife in his hand?
It is absurd to suppose that you have two enemies, one of whom robs you, while the other threatens your life.
"I have known him for some time," said I, "but I never knew him do anything yet without a very good reason," and with that our conversation drifted off on to other topics.
But it was a weary day for me. Phelps was still weak after his long illness, and his misfortune made him querulous and nervous.
In vain I endeavoured to interest him in Afghanistan, in India, in social questions, in anything which might take his mind out of the groove.
I don't know that. To my certain knowledge he has acted on behalf of three of the reigning houses of Europe in very vital matters.
But you know him well, Watson. He is such an inscrutable fellow that I never quite know what to make of him.
On the contrary, I have noticed that when he is off the trail he generally says so. It is when he is on a scent and is not quite absolutely sure yet that it is the right one that he is most taciturn.
Now, my dear fellow, we can't help matters by making ourselves nervous about them, so let me implore you to go to bed and so be fresh for whatever may await us to-morrow.
I was able at last to persuade my companion to take my advice, though I knew from his excited manner that there was not much hope of sleep for him.
Indeed, his mood was infectious, for I lay tossing half the night myself, brooding over this strange problem, and inventing a hundred theories, each of which was more impossible than the last.
Why had Holmes remained at Woking? Why had he asked Miss Harrison to remain in the sick-room all day?
Why had he been so careful not to inform the people at Briarbrae that he intended to remain near them?
I cudgelled my brains until I fell asleep in the endeavour to find some explanation which would cover all these facts.
It was seven o'clock when I awoke, and I set off at once for Phelps's room, to find him haggard and spent after a sleepless night.
And my words were true, for shortly after eight a hansom dashed up to the door and our friend got out of it.
Standing in the window we saw that his left hand was swathed in a bandage and that his face was very grim and pale.
I was forced to confess that he was right. "After all," said I, "the clue of the matter lies probably here in town."
"I don't know how it is," said he, "but I had hoped for so much from his return. But surely his hand was not tied up like that yesterday.
"Tut, it is only a scratch through my own clumsiness," he answered, nodding his good-mornings to us. "This case of yours, Mr. Phelps, is certainly one of the darkest which I have ever investigated."
After breakfast, my dear Watson. Remember that I have breathed thirty miles of Surrey air this morning.
I suppose that there has been no answer from my cabman advertisement? Well, well, we cannot expect to score every time.
The table was all laid, and just as I was about to ring Mrs. Hudson entered with the tea and coffee. A few minutes later she brought in three covers, and we all drew up to the table, Holmes ravenous, I curious, and Phelps in the gloomiest state of depression.
"Mrs. Hudson has risen to the occasion," said Holmes, uncovering a dish of curried chicken. "Her cuisine is a little limited, but she has as good an idea of breakfast as a Scotch-woman.
"Well, then," said Holmes, with a mischievous twinkle, "I suppose that you have no objection to helping me?"
Phelps raised the cover, and as he did so he uttered a scream, and sat there staring with a face as white as the plate upon which he looked.
Then he fell back into an armchair so limp and exhausted with his own emotions that we had to pour brandy down his throat to keep him from fainting.
"There! there!" said Holmes, soothing, patting him upon the shoulder. "It was too bad to spring it on you like this, but Watson here will tell you that I never can resist a touch of the dramatic."
"Well, my own was at stake, you know," said Holmes. "I assure you it is just as hateful to me to fail in a case as it can be to you to blunder over a commission."
I have not the heart to interrupt your breakfast any further, and yet I am dying to know how you got it and where it was.
Sherlock Holmes swallowed a cup of coffee, and turned his attention to the ham and eggs. Then he rose, lit his pipe, and settled himself down into his chair.
Well, I waited until the road was clear-it is never a very frequented one at any time, I fancy-and then I clambered over the fence into the grounds.
The night was fine, but still it was a very weary vigil. Of course it has the sort of excitement about it that the sportsman feels when he lies beside the water-course and waits for the big game.
It was very long, though-almost as long, Watson, as when you and I waited in that deadly room when we looked into the little problem of the Speckled Band.
There was a church-clock down at Woking which struck the quarters, and I thought more than once that it had stopped.
At last however about two in the morning, I suddenly heard the gentle sound of a bolt being pushed back and the creaking of a key.
A moment later the servants' door was opened, and Mr. Joseph Harrison stepped out into the moonlight.
"My God!" gasped our client. "Do you tell me that during these long ten weeks of agony the stolen papers were within the very room with me all the time?"
Hum! I am afraid Joseph's character is a rather deeper and more dangerous one than one might judge from his appearance.
From what I have heard from him this morning, I gather that he has lost heavily in dabbling with stocks, and that he is ready to do anything on earth to better his fortunes.
Being an absolutely selfish man, when a chance presented itself he did not allow either his sister's happiness or your reputation to hold his hand.
"The principal difficulty in your case," remarked Holmes, in his didactic fashion, "lay in the fact of there being too much evidence.
When I heard that some one had been so anxious to get into the bedroom, in which no one but Joseph could have concealed anything-you told us in your narrative how you had turned Joseph out when you arrived with the doctor-my suspicions all changed to certainties, especially as the attempt was made on the first night upon which the nurse was absent, showing that the intruder was well acquainted with the ways of the house.
The situation to him must have been a maddening one. But at last he thought he saw his chance. He tried to steal in, but was baffled by your wakefulness.
I fancy that he had taken steps to make that draught efficacious, and that he quite relied upon your being unconscious.
Of course, I understood that he would repeat the attempt whenever it could be done with safety. Your leaving the room gave him the chance he wanted.
I kept Miss Harrison in it all day so that he might not anticipate us. Then, having given him the idea that the coast was clear, I kept guard as I have described.
I already knew that the papers were probably in the room, but I had no desire to rip up all the planking and skirting in search of them.
I let him take them, therefore, from the hiding-place, and so saved myself an infinity of trouble. Is there any other point which I can make clear?
"Why did he try the window on the first occasion," I asked, "when he might have entered by the door?"
In reaching the door he would have to pass seven bedrooms. On the other hand, he could get out on to the lawn with ease.
"You do not think," asked Phelps, "that he had any murderous intention? The knife was only meant as a tool."
"It may be so," answered Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "I can only say for certain that Mr. Joseph Harrison is a gentleman to whose mercy I should be extremely unwilling to trust."
It is with a heavy heart that I take up my pen to write these the last words in which I shall ever record the singular gifts by which my friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes was distinguished.
It was my intention to have stopped there, and to have said nothing of that event which has created a void in my life which the lapse of two years has done little to fill.
I alone know the absolute truth of the matter, and I am satisfied that the time has come when no good purpose is to be served by its suppression.
Of these the first and second were extremely condensed, while the last is, as I shall now show, an absolute perversion of the facts.
It lies with me to tell for the first time what really took place between Professor Moriarty and Mr. Sherlock Holmes.
It may be remembered that after my marriage, and my subsequent start in private practice, the very intimate relations which had existed between Holmes and myself became to some extent modified.
It was with some surprise, therefore, that I saw him walk into my consulting-room upon the evening of the 24th of April.
"Yes, I have been using myself up rather too freely," he remarked, in answer to my look rather than to my words; "I have been a little pressed of late.
The only light in the room came from the lamp upon the table at which I had been reading. Holmes edged his way round the wall and flinging the shutters together, he bolted them securely.
Might I trouble you for a match?" He drew in the smoke of his cigarette as if the soothing influence was grateful to him.
"I must apologise for calling so late," said he, "and I must further beg you to be so unconventional as to allow me to leave your house presently by scrambling over your back garden wall."
He held out his hand, and I saw in the light of the lamp that two of his knuckles were burst and bleeding.
"It is not an airy nothing, you see," said he, smiling. "On the contrary, it is solid enough for a man to break his hand over.
Then it makes it the easier for me to propose that you should come away with me for a week to the Continent.
There was something very strange in all this. It was not Holmes's nature to take an aimless holiday, and something about his pale, worn face told me that his nerves were at their highest tension.
He saw the question in my eyes, and, putting his finger-tips together and his elbows upon his knees, he explained the situation.
"Aye, there's the genius and the wonder of the thing!" he cried. "The man pervades London, and no one has heard of him.
But I could not rest, Watson, I could not sit quiet in my chair, if I thought that such a man as Professor Moriarty were walking the streets of London unchallenged.
That was my singular interview with Professor Moriarty. I confess that it left an unpleasant effect upon my mind.
His soft, precise fashion of speech leaves a conviction of sincerity which a mere bully could not produce.
Of course, you will say: 'Why not take police precautions against him?' The reason is that I am well convinced that it is from his agents the blow will fall.
My dear Watson, Professor Moriarty is not a man who lets the grass grow under his feet. I went out about midday to transact some business in Oxford Street.
As I passed the corner which leads from Bentinck Street on to the Welbeck Street crossing a two-horse van furiously driven whizzed round and was on me like a flash.
I sprang for the foot-path and saved myself by the fraction of a second. The van dashed round by Marylebone Lane and was gone in an instant.
I kept to the pavement after that, Watson, but as I walked down Vere Street a brick came down from the roof of one of the houses, and was shattered to fragments at my feet.
Of course I knew better, but I could prove nothing. I took a cab after that and reached my brother's rooms in Pall Mall, where I spent the day.
You will not wonder, Watson, that my first act on entering your rooms was to close your shutters, and that I have been compelled to ask your permission to leave the house by some less conspicuous exit than the front door.
I had often admired my friend's courage, but never more than now, as he sat quietly checking off a series of incidents which must have combined to make up a day of horror.
It is obvious, therefore, that I cannot do better than get away for the few days which remain before the police are at liberty to act.
Now listen! You will dispatch whatever luggage you intend to take by a trusty messenger unaddressed to Victoria to-night.
In the morning you will send for a hansom, desiring your man to take neither the first nor the second which may present itself.
Into this hansom you will jump, and you will drive to the Strand end of the Lowther Arcade, handing the address to the cabman upon a slip of paper, with a request that he will not throw it away.
Have your fare ready, and the instant that your cab stops, dash through the Arcade, timing yourself to reach the other side at a quarter-past nine.
You will find a small brougham waiting close to the curb, driven by a fellow with a heavy black cloak tipped at the collar with red.
With a few hurried words as to our plans for the morrow he rose and came out with me into the garden, clambering over the wall which leads into Mortimer Street, and immediately whistling for a hansom, in which I heard him drive away.
A brougham was waiting with a very massive driver wrapped in a dark cloak, who, the instant that I had stepped in, whipped up the horse and rattled off to Victoria Station.
On my alighting there he turned the carriage, and dashed away again without so much as a look in my direction.
My only source of anxiety now was the non-appearance of Holmes. The station clock marked only seven minutes from the time when we were due to start.
In vain I searched among the groups of travellers and leave-takers for the lithe figure of my friend.
Then, having taken another look round, I returned to my carriage, where I found that the porter, in spite of the ticket, had given me my decrepit Italian friend as a traveling companion.
A chill of fear had come over me, as I thought that his absence might mean that some blow had fallen during the night.
"Every precaution is still necessary," he whispered. "I have reason to think that they are hot upon our trail.
The train had already begun to move as Holmes spoke. Glancing back, I saw a tall man pushing his way furiously through the crowd, and waving his hand as if he desired to have the train stopped.
It was too late, however, for we were rapidly gathering momentum, and an instant later had shot clear of the station.
"With all our precautions, you see that we have cut it rather fine," said Holmes, laughing. He rose, and throwing off the black cassock and hat which had formed his disguise, he packed them away in a hand-bag.
They must have lost my track completely after their bludgeon-man was arrested. Otherwise they could not have imagined that I had returned to my rooms.
They have evidently taken the precaution of watching you, however, and that is what has brought Moriarty to Victoria.
It was my brother Mycroft. It is an advantage to get about in such a case without taking a mercenary into your confidence.
As this is an express, and as the boat runs in connection with it, I should think we have shaken him off very effectively.
My dear Watson, you evidently did not realize my meaning when I said that this man may be taken as being quite on the same intellectual plane as myself.
You do not imagine that if I were the pursuer I should allow myself to be baffled by so slight an obstacle.
By no means. This train stops at Canterbury; and there is always at least a quarter of an hour's delay at the boat.
It would be to ruin the work of three months. We should get the big fish, but the smaller would dart right and left out of the net.
Well, then we must make a cross-country journey to Newhaven, and so over to Dieppe. Moriarty will again do what I should do.
At Canterbury, therefore, we alighted, only to find that we should have to wait an hour before we could get a train to Newhaven.
I was still looking rather ruefully after the rapidly disappearing luggage-van which contained my wardrobe, when Holmes pulled my sleeve and pointed up the line.
Far away, from among the Kentish woods there rose a thin spray of smoke. A minute later a carriage and engine could be seen flying along the open curve which leads to the station.
We had hardly time to take our place behind a pile of luggage when it passed with a rattle and a roar, beating a blast of hot air into our faces.
"There he goes," said Holmes, as we watched the carriage swing and rock over the points. "There are limits, you see, to our friend's intelligence.
There cannot be the least doubt that he would have made a murderous attack upon me. It is, however, a game at which two may play.
The question now is whether we should take a premature lunch here, or run our chance of starving before we reach the buffet at Newhaven.
We made our way to Brussels that night and spent two days there, moving on upon the third day as far as Strasburg.
On the Monday morning Holmes had telegraphed to the London police, and in the evening we found a reply waiting for us at our hotel.
They have secured the whole gang with the exception of him. He has given them the slip. Of course, when I had left the country there was no one to cope with him.
But I did think that I had put the game in their hands. I think that you had better return to England, Watson.
Because you will find me a dangerous companion now. This man's occupation is gone. He is lost if he returns to London.
If I read his character right he will devote his whole energies to revenging himself upon me. He said as much in our short interview, and I fancy that he meant it.
It was hardly an appeal to be successful with one who was an old campaigner as well as an old friend.
For a charming week we wandered up the Valley of the Rhone, and then, branching off at Leuk, we made our way over the Gemmi Pass, still deep in snow, and so, by way of Interlaken, to Meiringen.
It was a lovely trip, the dainty green of the spring below, the virgin white of the winter above; but it was clear to me that never for one instant did Holmes forget the shadow which lay across him.
In the homely Alpine villages or in the lonely mountain passes, I could tell by his quick glancing eyes and his sharp scrutiny of every face that passed us, that he was well convinced that, walk where we would, we could not walk ourselves clear of the danger which was dogging our footsteps.
In an instant Holmes had raced up on to the ridge, and, standing upon a lofty pinnacle, craned his neck in every direction.
It was in vain that our guide assured him that a fall of stones was a common chance in the spring-time at that spot.
He said nothing, but he smiled at me with the air of a man who sees the fulfillment of that which he had expected.
And yet for all his watchfulness he was never depressed. On the contrary, I can never recollect having seen him in such exuberant spirits.
Again and again he recurred to the fact that if he could be assured that society was freed from Professor Moriarty he would cheerfully bring his own career to a conclusion.
"I think that I may go so far as to say, Watson, that I have not lived wholly in vain," he remarked. "If my record were closed to-night I could still survey it with equanimity.
The air of London is the sweeter for my presence. In over a thousand cases I am not aware that I have ever used my powers upon the wrong side.
Of late I have been tempted to look into the problems furnished by nature rather than those more superficial ones for which our artificial state of society is responsible.
Your memoirs will draw to an end, Watson, upon the day that I crown my career by the capture or extinction of the most dangerous and capable criminal in Europe.
I shall be brief, and yet exact, in the little which remains for me to tell. It is not a subject on which I would willingly dwell, and yet I am conscious that a duty devolves upon me to omit no detail.
It was on the 3rd of May that we reached the little village of Meiringen, where we put up at the Englischer Hof, then kept by Peter Steiler the elder.
Our landlord was an intelligent man, and spoke excellent English, having served for three years as waiter at the Grosvenor Hotel in London.
At his advice, on the afternoon of the 4th we set off together, with the intention of crossing the hills and spending the night at the hamlet of Rosenlaui.
It is indeed, a fearful place. The torrent, swollen by the melting snow, plunges into a tremendous abyss, from which the spray rolls up like the smoke from a burning house.
The long sweep of green water roaring forever down, and the thick flickering curtain of spray hissing forever upward, turn a man giddy with their constant whirl and clamour.
We stood near the edge peering down at the gleam of the breaking water far below us against the black rocks, and listening to the half-human shout which came booming up with the spray out of the abyss.
The path has been cut half-way round the fall to afford a complete view, but it ends abruptly, and the traveler has to return as he came.
We had turned to do so, when we saw a Swiss lad come running along it with a letter in his hand. It bore the mark of the hotel which we had just left, and was addressed to me by the landlord.
It appeared that within a very few minutes of our leaving, an English lady had arrived who was in the last stage of consumption.
She had wintered at Davos Platz, and was journeying now to join her friends at Lucerne, when a sudden hemorrhage had overtaken her.
It was thought that she could hardly live a few hours, but it would be a great consolation to her to see an English doctor, and, if I would only return, etc.
The good Steiler assured me in a postscript that he would himself look upon my compliance as a very great favour, since the lady absolutely refused to see a Swiss physician, and he could not but feel that he was incurring a great responsibility.
The appeal was one which could not be ignored. It was impossible to refuse the request of a fellow-countrywoman dying in a strange land.
Yet I had my scruples about leaving Holmes. It was finally agreed, however, that he should retain the young Swiss messenger with him as guide and companion while I returned to Meiringen.
My friend would stay some little time at the fall, he said, and would then walk slowly over the hill to Rosenlaui, where I was to rejoin him in the evening.
As I turned away I saw Holmes, with his back against a rock and his arms folded, gazing down at the rush of the waters.
I could see his black figure clearly outlined against the green behind him. I noted him, and the energy with which he walked but he passed from my mind again as I hurried on upon my errand.
It may have been a little over an hour before I reached Meiringen. Old Steiler was standing at the porch of his hotel.
A look of surprise passed over his face, and at the first quiver of his eyebrows my heart turned to lead in my breast.
"You did not write this?" I said, pulling the letter from my pocket. "There is no sick Englishwoman in the hotel?"
"Certainly not!" he cried. "But it has the hotel mark upon it! Ha, it must have been written by that tall Englishman who came in after you had gone.
But I waited for none of the landlord's explanations. In a tingle of fear I was already running down the village street, and making for the path which I had so lately descended.
It had taken me an hour to come down. For all my efforts two more had passed before I found myself at the fall of Reichenbach once more.
There was Holmes's Alpine-stock still leaning against the rock by which I had left him. But there was no sign of him, and it was in vain that I shouted.
It was the sight of that Alpine-stock which turned me cold and sick. He had not gone to Rosenlaui, then.
He had remained on that three-foot path, with sheer wall on one side and sheer drop on the other, until his enemy had overtaken him.
The young Swiss had gone too. He had probably been in the pay of Moriarty, and had left the two men together.
I stood for a minute or two to collect myself, for I was dazed with the horror of the thing. Then I began to think of Holmes's own methods and to try to practise them in reading this tragedy.
It was, alas, only too easy to do. During our conversation we had not gone to the end of the path, and the Alpine-stock marked the place where we had stood.
The blackish soil is kept forever soft by the incessant drift of spray, and a bird would leave its tread upon it.
Two lines of footmarks were clearly marked along the farther end of the path, both leading away from me.
There were none returning. A few yards from the end the soil was all ploughed up into a patch of mud, and the branches and ferns which fringed the chasm were torn and bedraggled.
From the top of this boulder the gleam of something bright caught my eye, and, raising my hand, I found that it came from the silver cigarette-case which he used to carry.
As I took it up a small square of paper upon which it had lain fluttered down on to the ground. Unfolding it, I found that it consisted of three pages torn from his note-book and addressed to me.
It was characteristic of the man that the direction was a precise, and the writing as firm and clear, as though it had been written in his study.
The Swiss youth was never found again, and there can be no doubt that he was one of the numerous agents whom Moriarty kept in his employ.
Of their terrible chief few details came out during the proceedings, and if I have now been compelled to make a clear statement of his career it is due to those injudicious champions who have endeavoured to clear his memory by attacks upon him whom I shall ever regard as the best and the wisest man whom I have ever known.
The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton The Adventure of the Six Napoleons The Adventure of the Three Students The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez The Adventure of the Missing Three-Quarter The Adventure of the Abbey Grange The Adventure of the Second Stain
Only now, at the end of nearly ten years, am I allowed to supply those missing links which make up the whole of that remarkable chain.
Even now, after this long interval, I find myself thrilling as I think of it, and feeling once more that sudden flood of joy, amazement, and incredulity which utterly submerged my mind.
Let me say to that public, which has shown some interest in those glimpses which I have occasionally given them of the thoughts and actions of a very remarkable man, that they are not to blame me if I have not shared my knowledge with them, for I should have considered it my first duty to do so, had I not been barred by a positive prohibition from his own lips, which was only withdrawn upon the third of last month.
And I even attempted, more than once, for my own private satisfaction, to employ his methods in their solution, though with indifferent success.
All day, as I drove upon my round, I turned over the case in my mind and found no explanation which appeared to me to be adequate.
At the risk of telling a twice-told tale, I will recapitulate the facts as they were known to the public at the conclusion of the inquest.
The Honourable Ronald Adair was the second son of the Earl of Maynooth, at that time governor of one of the Australian colonies.
Adair's mother had returned from Australia to undergo the operation for cataract, and she, her son Ronald, and her daughter Hilda were living together at 427, Park Lane.
For the rest, the man's life moved in a narrow and conventional circle, for his habits were quiet and his nature unemotional.
Yet it was upon this easy-going young aristocrat that death came, in most strange and unexpected form, between the hours of ten and eleven-twenty on the night of March 30, 1894.
Ronald Adair was fond of cards-playing continually, but never for such stakes as would hurt him. He was a member of the Baldwin, the Cavendish, and the Bagatelle card clubs.
It was shown that, after dinner on the day of his death, he had played a rubber of whist at the latter club.
Adair might have lost five pounds, but not more. His fortune was a considerable one, and such a loss could not in any way affect him.
He had played nearly every day at one club or other, but he was a cautious player, and usually rose a winner.
It came out in evidence that, in partnership with Colonel Moran, he had actually won as much as four hundred and twenty pounds in a sitting, some weeks before, from Godfrey Milner and Lord Balmoral.
On the evening of the crime, he returned from the club exactly at ten. His mother and sister were out spending the evening with a relation.
The servant deposed that she heard him enter the front room on the second floor, generally used as his sitting-room.
She had lit a fire there, and as it smoked she had opened the window. No sound was heard from the room until eleven-twenty, the hour of the return of Lady Maynooth and her daughter.
Desiring to say good-night, she attempted to enter her son's room. The door was locked on the inside, and no answer could be got to their cries and knocking.
On the table lay two banknotes for ten pounds each and seventeen pounds ten in silver and gold, the money arranged in little piles of varying amount.
There were some figures also upon a sheet of paper, with the names of some club friends opposite to them, from which it was conjectured that before his death he was endeavouring to make out his losses or winnings at cards.
A minute examination of the circumstances served only to make the case more complex. In the first place, no reason could be given why the young man should have fastened the door upon the inside.
There was the possibility that the murderer had done this, and had afterwards escaped by the window. The drop was at least twenty feet, however, and a bed of crocuses in full bloom lay beneath.
Neither the flowers nor the earth showed any sign of having been disturbed, nor were there any marks upon the narrow strip of grass which separated the house from the road.
Apparently, therefore, it was the young man himself who had fastened the door. But how did he come by his death?
Again, Park Lane is a frequented thoroughfare; there is a cab stand within a hundred yards of the house.
Such were the circumstances of the Park Lane Mystery, which were further complicated by entire absence of motive, since, as I have said, young Adair was not known to have any enemy, and no attempt had been made to remove the money or valuables in the room.
I confess that I made little progress. In the evening I strolled across the Park, and found myself about six o'clock at the Oxford Street end of Park Lane.
A group of loafers upon the pavements, all staring up at a particular window, directed me to the house which I had come to see.
I got as near him as I could, but his observations seemed to me to be absurd, so I withdrew again in some disgust.
As I did so I struck against an elderly, deformed man, who had been behind me, and I knocked down several books which he was carrying.
I endeavoured to apologize for the accident, but it was evident that these books which I had so unfortunately maltreated were very precious objects in the eyes of their owner.
More puzzled than ever, I retraced my steps to Kensington. I had not been in my study five minutes when the maid entered to say that a person desired to see me.
To my astonishment it was none other than my strange old book collector, his sharp, wizened face peering out from a frame of white hair, and his precious volumes, a dozen of them at least, wedged under his right arm.
Well, I've a conscience, sir, and when I chanced to see you go into this house, as I came hobbling after you, I thought to myself, I'll just step in and see that kind gentleman, and tell him that if I was a bit gruff in my manner there was not any harm meant, and that I am much obliged to him for picking up my books.
Well, sir, if it isn't too great a liberty, I am a neighbour of yours, for you'll find my little bookshop at the corner of Church Street, and very happy to see you, I am sure.
Maybe you collect yourself, sir. Here's _British Birds_, and _Catullus_, and _The Holy War_-a bargain, every one of them.
With five volumes you could just fill that gap on that second shelf. It looks untidy, does it not, sir?
I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me. When I turned again, Sherlock Holmes was standing smiling at me across my study table.
I rose to my feet, stared at him for some seconds in utter amazement, and then it appears that I must have fainted for the first and the last time in my life.
Certainly a grey mist swirled before my eyes, and when it cleared I found my collar-ends undone and the tingling after-taste of brandy upon my lips.
"My dear Watson," said the well-remembered voice, "I owe you a thousand apologies. I had no idea that you would be so affected."
"Holmes!" I cried. "Is it really you? Can it indeed be that you are alive? Is it possible that you succeeded in climbing out of that awful abyss?"
"Wait a moment," said he. "Are you sure that you are really fit to discuss things? I have given you a serious shock by my unnecessarily dramatic reappearance."
I am all right, but indeed, Holmes, I can hardly believe my eyes. Good heavens! to think that you-you of all men-should be standing in my study.
Again I gripped him by the sleeve, and felt the thin, sinewy arm beneath it. "Well, you're not a spirit anyhow," said I.
My dear chap, I'm overjoyed to see you. Sit down, and tell me how you came alive out of that dreadful chasm.
Holmes looked even thinner and keener than of old, but there was a dead-white tinge in his aquiline face which told me that his life recently had not been a healthy one.
"I am glad to stretch myself, Watson," said he. "It is no joke when a tall man has to take a foot off his stature for several hours on end.
Now, my dear fellow, in the matter of these explanations, we have, if I may ask for your cooperation, a hard and dangerous night's work in front of us.
Perhaps it would be better if I gave you an account of the whole situation when that work is finished.
This is, indeed, like the old days. We shall have time for a mouthful of dinner before we need go. Well, then, about that chasm.
I read an inexorable purpose in his grey eyes. I exchanged some remarks with him, therefore, and obtained his courteous permission to write the short note which you afterwards received.
I left it with my cigarette-box and my stick, and I walked along the pathway, Moriarty still at my heels.
When I reached the end I stood at bay. He drew no weapon, but he rushed at me and threw his long arms around me.
He knew that his own game was up, and was only anxious to revenge himself upon me. We tottered together upon the brink of the fall.
I have some knowledge, however, of baritsu, or the Japanese system of wrestling, which has more than once been very useful to me.
I slipped through his grip, and he with a horrible scream kicked madly for a few seconds, and clawed the air with both his hands.
But for all his efforts he could not get his balance, and over he went. With my face over the brink, I saw him fall for a long way.
I listened with amazement to this explanation, which Holmes delivered between the puffs of his cigarette.
I travelled for two years in Tibet, therefore, and amused myself by visiting Lhassa, and spending some days with the head lama.
You may have read of the remarkable explorations of a Norwegian named Sigerson, but I am sure that it never occurred to you that you were receiving news of your friend.
I then passed through Persia, looked in at Mecca, and paid a short but interesting visit to the Khalifa at Khartoum the results of which I have communicated to the Foreign Office.
Returning to France, I spent some months in a research into the coal-tar derivatives, which I conducted in a laboratory at Montpellier, in the south of France.
So it was, my dear Watson, that at two o'clock to-day I found myself in my old armchair in my own old room, and only wishing that I could have seen my old friend Watson in the other chair which he has so often adorned.
In some manner he had learned of my own sad bereavement, and his sympathy was shown in his manner rather than in his words.
In vain I begged him to tell me more. "You will hear and see enough before morning," he answered. "We have three years of the past to discuss.
It was indeed like old times when, at that hour, I found myself seated beside him in a hansom, my revolver in my pocket, and the thrill of adventure in my heart.
Holmes was cold and stern and silent. As the gleam of the street-lamps flashed upon his austere features, I saw that his brows were drawn down in thought and his thin lips compressed.
I knew not what wild beast we were about to hunt down in the dark jungle of criminal London, but I was well assured, from the bearing of this master huntsman, that the adventure was a most grave one-while the sardonic smile which occasionally broke through his ascetic gloom boded little good for the object of our quest.
I had imagined that we were bound for Baker Street, but Holmes stopped the cab at the corner of Cavendish Square.
I observed that as he stepped out he gave a most searching glance to right and left, and at every subsequent street corner he took the utmost pains to assure that he was not followed.
We emerged at last into a small road, lined with old, gloomy houses, which led us into Manchester Street, and so to Blandford Street.
Here he turned swiftly down a narrow passage, passed through a wooden gate into a deserted yard, and then opened with a key the back door of a house.
Holmes's cold, thin fingers closed round my wrist and led me forward down a long hall, until I dimly saw the murky fanlight over the door.
Here Holmes turned suddenly to the right and we found ourselves in a large, square, empty room, heavily shadowed in the corners, but faintly lit in the centre from the lights of the street beyond.
There was no lamp near, and the window was thick with dust, so that we could only just discern each other's figures within.
I crept forward and looked across at the familiar window. As my eyes fell upon it, I gave a gasp and a cry of amazement.
The blind was down, and a strong light was burning in the room. The shadow of a man who was seated in a chair within was thrown in hard, black outline upon the luminous screen of the window.
There was no mistaking the poise of the head, the squareness of the shoulders, the sharpness of the features.
The face was turned half-round, and the effect was that of one of those black silhouettes which our grandparents loved to frame.
It was a perfect reproduction of Holmes. So amazed was I that I threw out my hand to make sure that the man himself was standing beside me.
"I trust that age doth not wither nor custom stale my infinite variety," said he, and I recognized in his voice the joy and pride which the artist takes in his own creation.
The credit of the execution is due to Monsieur Oscar Meunier, of Grenoble, who spent some days in doing the moulding.
Because, my dear Watson, I had the strongest possible reason for wishing certain people to think that I was there when I was really elsewhere.
By my old enemies, Watson. By the charming society whose leader lies in the Reichenbach Fall. You must remember that they knew, and only they knew, that I was still alive.
Sooner or later they believed that I should come back to my rooms. They watched them continuously, and this morning they saw me arrive.
Because I recognized their sentinel when I glanced out of my window. He is a harmless enough fellow, Parker by name, a garroter by trade, and a remarkable performer upon the jew's-harp.
That is the man who is after me to-night Watson, and that is the man who is quite unaware that we are after _him_.
My friend's plans were gradually revealing themselves. From this convenient retreat, the watchers were being watched and the trackers tracked.
That angular shadow up yonder was the bait, and we were the hunters. In silence we stood together in the darkness and watched the hurrying figures who passed and repassed in front of us.
Holmes was silent and motionless; but I could tell that he was keenly alert, and that his eyes were fixed intently upon the stream of passers-by.
It was a bleak and boisterous night and the wind whistled shrilly down the long street. Many people were moving to and fro, most of them muffled in their coats and cravats.
I tried to draw my companion's attention to them; but he gave a little ejaculation of impatience, and continued to stare into the street.
At last, as midnight approached and the street gradually cleared, he paced up and down the room in uncontrollable agitation.
I was about to make some remark to him, when I raised my eyes to the lighted window, and again experienced almost as great a surprise as before.
Three years had certainly not smoothed the asperities of his temper or his impatience with a less active intelligence than his own.
"Of course it has moved," said he. "Am I such a farcical bungler, Watson, that I should erect an obvious dummy, and expect that some of the sharpest men in Europe would be deceived by it?
We have been in this room two hours, and Mrs. Hudson has made some change in that figure eight times, or once in every quarter of an hour.
She works it from the front, so that her shadow may never be seen. Ah!" He drew in his breath with a shrill, excited intake.
In the dim light I saw his head thrown forward, his whole attitude rigid with attention. Outside the street was absolutely deserted.
Again in the utter silence I heard that thin, sibilant note which spoke of intense suppressed excitement.
An instant later he pulled me back into the blackest corner of the room, and I felt his warning hand upon my lips.
The fingers which clutched me were quivering. Never had I known my friend more moved, and yet the dark street still stretched lonely and motionless before us.
A door opened and shut. An instant later steps crept down the passage-steps which were meant to be silent, but which reverberated harshly through the empty house.
Holmes crouched back against the wall, and I did the same, my hand closing upon the handle of my revolver.
Peering through the gloom, I saw the vague outline of a man, a shade blacker than the blackness of the open door.
He passed close beside us, stole over to the window, and very softly and noiselessly raised it for half a foot.
As he sank to the level of this opening, the light of the street, no longer dimmed by the dusty glass, fell full upon his face.
The man seemed to be beside himself with excitement. His two eyes shone like stars, and his features were working convulsively.
He was an elderly man, with a thin, projecting nose, a high, bald forehead, and a huge grizzled moustache.
An opera hat was pushed to the back of his head, and an evening dress shirt-front gleamed out through his open overcoat.
His face was gaunt and swarthy, scored with deep, savage lines. In his hand he carried what appeared to be a stick, but as he laid it down upon the floor it gave a metallic clang.
Then from the pocket of his overcoat he drew a bulky object, and he busied himself in some task which ended with a loud, sharp click, as if a spring or bolt had fallen into its place.
He straightened himself then, and I saw that what he held in his hand was a sort of gun, with a curiously misshapen butt.
I heard a little sigh of satisfaction as he cuddled the butt into his shoulder; and saw that amazing target, the black man on the yellow ground, standing clear at the end of his foresight.
For an instant he was rigid and motionless. Then his finger tightened on the trigger. There was a strange, loud whiz and a long, silvery tinkle of broken glass.
At that instant Holmes sprang like a tiger on to the marksman's back, and hurled him flat upon his face.
He was up again in a moment, and with convulsive strength he seized Holmes by the throat, but I struck him on the head with the butt of my revolver, and he dropped again upon the floor.
I fell upon him, and as I held him my comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle. There was the clatter of running feet upon the pavement, and two policemen in uniform, with one plain-clothes detective, rushed through the front entrance and into the room.
I think you want a little unofficial help. Three undetected murders in one year won't do, Lestrade. But you handled the Molesey Mystery with less than your usual-that's to say, you handled it fairly well.
We had all risen to our feet, our prisoner breathing hard, with a stalwart constable on each side of him.
Already a few loiterers had begun to collect in the street. Holmes stepped up to the window, closed it, and dropped the blinds.
Lestrade had produced two candles, and the policemen had uncovered their lanterns. I was able at last to have a good look at our prisoner.
He took no heed of any of us, but his eyes were fixed upon Holmes's face with an expression in which hatred and amazement were equally blended.
"Ah, Colonel!" said Holmes, arranging his rumpled collar. "'Journeys end in lovers' meetings,' as the old play says.
I don't think I have had the pleasure of seeing you since you favoured me with those attentions as I lay on the ledge above the Reichenbach Fall.
The colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance. "You cunning, cunning fiend!" was all that he could say.
"I have not introduced you yet," said Holmes. "This, gentlemen, is Colonel Sebastian Moran, once of Her Majesty's Indian Army, and the best heavy-game shot that our Eastern Empire has ever produced.
The fierce old man said nothing, but still glared at my companion. With his savage eyes and bristling moustache he was wonderfully like a tiger himself.
"I wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old a _shikari_," said Holmes. "It must be very familiar to you.
Have you not tethered a young kid under a tree, lain above it with your rifle, and waited for the bait to bring up your tiger?
This empty house is my tree, and you are my tiger. You have possibly had other guns in reserve in case there should be several tigers, or in the unlikely supposition of your own aim failing you.
Colonel Moran sprang forward with a snarl of rage, but the constables dragged him back. The fury upon his face was terrible to look at.
"I confess that you had one small surprise for me," said Holmes. "I did not anticipate that you would yourself make use of this empty house and this convenient front window.
I had imagined you as operating from the street, where my friend, Lestrade and his merry men were awaiting you.
"You may or may not have just cause for arresting me," said he, "but at least there can be no reason why I should submit to the gibes of this person.
"Well, that's reasonable enough," said Lestrade. "Nothing further you have to say, Mr. Holmes, before we go?"
"An admirable and unique weapon," said he, "noiseless and of tremendous power: I knew Von Herder, the blind German mechanic, who constructed it to the order of the late Professor Moriarty.
For years I have been aware of its existence though I have never before had the opportunity of handling it.
"You can trust us to look after that, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, as the whole party moved towards the door.
Not so, Lestrade. I do not propose to appear in the matter at all. To you, and to you only, belongs the credit of the remarkable arrest which you have effected.
Yes, Lestrade, I congratulate you! With your usual happy mixture of cunning and audacity, you have got him.
Our old chambers had been left unchanged through the supervision of Mycroft Holmes and the immediate care of Mrs. Hudson.
As I entered I saw, it is true, an unwonted tidiness, but the old landmarks were all in their place. There were the chemical corner and the acid-stained, deal-topped table.
There upon a shelf was the row of formidable scrap-books and books of reference which many of our fellow-citizens would have been so glad to burn.
The diagrams, the violin-case, and the pipe-rack-even the Persian slipper which contained the tobacco-all met my eyes as I glanced round me.
There were two occupants of the room-one, Mrs. Hudson, who beamed upon us both as we entered-the other, the strange dummy which had played so important a part in the evening's adventures.
It was a wax-coloured model of my friend, so admirably done that it was a perfect facsimile. It stood on a small pedestal table with an old dressing-gown of Holmes's so draped round it that the illusion from the street was absolutely perfect.
Yes, sir. I'm afraid it has spoilt your beautiful bust, for it passed right through the head and flattened itself on the wall.
Holmes held it out to me. "A soft revolver bullet, as you perceive, Watson. There's genius in that, for who would expect to find such a thing fired from an airgun?
All right, Mrs. Hudson. I am much obliged for your assistance. And now, Watson, let me see you in your old seat once more, for there are several points which I should like to discuss with you.
He had thrown off the seedy frockcoat, and now he was the Holmes of old in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown which he took from his effigy.
"The old shikari's nerves have not lost their steadiness, nor his eyes their keenness," said he, with a laugh, as he inspected the shattered forehead of his bust.
Plumb in the middle of the back of the head and smack through the brain. He was the best shot in India, and I expect that there are few better in London.
Well, well, such is fame! But, then, if I remember right, you had not heard the name of Professor James Moriarty, who had one of the great brains of the century.
"My collection of M's is a fine one," said he. "Moriarty himself is enough to make any letter illustrious, and here is Morgan the poisoner, and Merridew of abominable memory, and Mathews, who knocked out my left canine in the waiting-room at Charing Cross, and, finally, here is our friend of to-night."
Educated Eton and Oxford. Served in Jowaki Campaign, Afghan Campaign, Charasiab (despatches), Sherpur, and Cabul.
Author of _Heavy Game of the Western Himalayas_ (1881); _Three Months in the Jungle_ (1884). Address: Conduit Street.
"This is astonishing," said I, as I handed back the volume. "The man's career is that of an honourable soldier."
There are some trees, Watson, which grow to a certain height, and then suddenly develop some unsightly eccentricity.
You may think that I read the papers with some attention during my sojourn in France, on the look-out for any chance of laying him by the heels.
So long as he was free in London, my life would really not have been worth living. Night and day the shadow would have been over me, and sooner or later his chance must have come.
What could I do? I could not shoot him at sight, or I should myself be in the dock. There was no use appealing to a magistrate.
They cannot interfere on the strength of what would appear to them to be a wild suspicion. So I could do nothing.
But I watched the criminal news, knowing that sooner or later I should get him. Then came the death of this Ronald Adair.
There was not a doubt of it. The bullets alone are enough to put his head in a noose. I came over at once.
I was seen by the sentinel, who would, I knew, direct the colonel's attention to my presence. He could not fail to connect my sudden return with his crime, and to be terribly alarmed.
I was sure that he would make an attempt to get me out of the way _at once_, and would bring round his murderous weapon for that purpose.
"Yes," said I. "You have not made it clear what was Colonel Moran's motive in murdering the Honourable Ronald Adair?"
Ah! my dear Watson, there we come into those realms of conjecture, where the most logical mind may be at fault.
Each may form his own hypothesis upon the present evidence, and yours is as likely to be correct as mine.
I think that it is not difficult to explain the facts. It came out in evidence that Colonel Moran and young Adair had, between them, won a considerable amount of money.
Now, Moran undoubtedly played foul-of that I have long been aware. I believe that on the day of the murder Adair had discovered that Moran was cheating.
Very likely he had spoken to him privately, and had threatened to expose him unless he voluntarily resigned his membership of the club, and promised not to play cards again.
It is unlikely that a youngster like Adair would at once make a hideous scandal by exposing a well-known man so much older than himself.
Probably he acted as I suggest. The exclusion from his clubs would mean ruin to Moran, who lived by his ill-gotten card-gains.
He therefore murdered Adair, who at the time was endeavouring to work out how much money he should himself return, since he could not profit by his partner's foul play.
He locked the door lest the ladies should surprise him and insist upon knowing what he was doing with these names and coins.
It will be verified or disproved at the trial. Meanwhile, come what may, Colonel Moran will trouble us no more.
The famous air-gun of Von Herder will embellish the Scotland Yard Museum, and once again Mr. Sherlock Holmes is free to devote his life to examining those interesting little problems which the complex life of London so plentifully presents.
"From the point of view of the criminal expert," said Mr. Sherlock Holmes, "London has become a singularly uninteresting city since the death of the late lamented Professor Moriarty."
"Well, well, I must not be selfish," said he, with a smile, as he pushed back his chair from the breakfast-table.
The community is certainly the gainer, and no one the loser, save the poor out-of-work specialist, whose occupation has gone.
Petty thefts, wanton assaults, purposeless outrage-to the man who held the clue all could be worked into one connected whole.
To the scientific student of the higher criminal world, no capital in Europe offered the advantages which London then possessed.
But now--" He shrugged his shoulders in humorous deprecation of the state of things which he had himself done so much to produce.
At the time of which I speak, Holmes had been back for some months, and I at his request had sold my practice and returned to share the old quarters in Baker Street.
A young doctor, named Verner, had purchased my small Kensington practice, and given with astonishingly little demur the highest price that I ventured to ask-an incident which only explained itself some years later, when I found that Verner was a distant relation of Holmes, and that it was my friend who had really found the money.
His cold and proud nature was always averse, however, from anything in the shape of public applause, and he bound me in the most stringent terms to say no further word of himself, his methods, or his successes-a prohibition which, as I have explained, has only now been removed.
He looked from one to the other of us, and under our gaze of inquiry he became conscious that some apology was needed for this unceremonious entry.
"I'm sorry, Mr. Holmes," he cried. "You mustn't blame me. I am nearly mad. Mr. Holmes, I am the unhappy John Hector McFarlane."
He made the announcement as if the name alone would explain both his visit and its manner, but I could see, by my companion's unresponsive face, that it meant no more to him than to me.
"Have a cigarette, Mr. McFarlane," said he, pushing his case across. "I am sure that, with your symptoms, my friend Dr. Watson here would prescribe a sedative.
You mentioned your name, as if I should recognize it, but I assure you that, beyond the obvious facts that you are a bachelor, a solicitor, a Freemason, and an asthmatic, I know nothing whatever about you.
Yes, I am all that, Mr. Holmes; and, in addition, I am the most unfortunate man at this moment in London.
For heaven's sake, don't abandon me, Mr. Holmes! If they come to arrest me before I have finished my story, make them give me time, so that I may tell you the whole truth.
"Arrest you!" said Holmes. "This is really most grati-most interesting. On what charge do you expect to be arrested?"
My companion's expressive face showed a sympathy which was not, I am afraid, entirely unmixed with satisfaction.
"Dear me," said he, "it was only this moment at breakfast that I was saying to my friend, Dr. Watson, that sensational cases had disappeared out of our papers."
Our visitor stretched forward a quivering hand and picked up the _Daily Telegraph_, which still lay upon Holmes's knee.
If you had looked at it, sir, you would have seen at a glance what the errand is on which I have come to you this morning.
I feel as if my name and my misfortune must be in every man's mouth." He turned it over to expose the central page.
Here it is, and with your permission I will read it to you. Listen to this, Mr. Holmes. The headlines are: 'Mysterious Affair at Lower Norwood.
I have been followed from London Bridge Station, and I am sure that they are only waiting for the warrant to arrest me.
It will break my mother's heart-it will break her heart!" He wrung his hands in an agony of apprehension, and swayed backward and forward in his chair.
I looked with interest upon this man, who was accused of being the perpetrator of a crime of violence.
He was flaxen-haired and handsome, in a washed-out negative fashion, with frightened blue eyes, and a clean-shaven face, with a weak, sensitive mouth.
His age may have been about twenty-seven, his dress and bearing that of a gentleman. From the pocket of his light summer overcoat protruded the bundle of indorsed papers which proclaimed his profession.
"We must use what time we have," said Holmes. "Watson, would you have the kindness to take the paper and to read the paragraph in question?"
Underneath the vigorous headlines which our client had quoted, I read the following suggestive narrative:
"The case has certainly some points of interest," said he, in his languid fashion. "May I ask, in the first place, Mr. McFarlane, how it is that you are still at liberty, since there appears to be enough evidence to justify your arrest?"
I knew nothing of this affair until I was in the train, when I read what you have just heard. I at once saw the horrible danger of my position, and I hurried to put the case into your hands.
I have no doubt that I should have been arrested either at my city office or at my home. A man followed me from London Bridge Station, and I have no doubt-Great heaven!
It was a clang of the bell, followed instantly by heavy steps upon the stair. A moment later, our old friend Lestrade appeared in the doorway.
McFarlane turned to us with a gesture of despair, and sank into his chair once more like one who is crushed.
"One moment, Lestrade," said Holmes. "Half an hour more or less can make no difference to you, and the gentleman was about to give us an account of this very interesting affair, which might aid us in clearing it up."
"Well, Mr. Holmes, it is difficult for me to refuse you anything, for you have been of use to the force once or twice in the past, and we owe you a good turn at Scotland Yard," said Lestrade.
At the same time I must remain with my prisoner, and I am bound to warn him that anything he may say will appear in evidence against him.
"I wish nothing better," said our client. "All I ask is that you should hear and recognize the absolute truth."
You can imagine, Mr. Holmes, that I was not in a humour to refuse him anything that he might ask. He was my benefactor, and all my desire was to carry out his wishes in every particular.
I sent a telegram home, therefore, to say that I had important business on hand, and that it was impossible for me to say how late I might be.
Mr. Oldacre had told me that he would like me to have supper with him at nine, as he might not be home before that hour.
I had some difficulty in finding his house, however, and it was nearly half-past before I reached it.
I was shown by this woman into a sitting-room, where a frugal supper was laid out. Afterwards, Mr. Jonas Oldacre led me into his bedroom, in which there stood a heavy safe.
This he opened and took out a mass of documents, which we went over together. It was between eleven and twelve when we finished.
He remarked that we must not disturb the housekeeper. He showed me out through his own French window, which had been open all this time.
I will not be sure, but I believe that it was only half down. Yes, I remember how he pulled it up in order to swing open the window.
I could not find my stick, and he said, 'Never mind, my boy, I shall see a good deal of you now, I hope, and I will keep your stick until you come back to claim it.'
I left him there, the safe open, and the papers made up in packets upon the table. It was so late that I could not get back to Blackheath, so I spent the night at the Anerley Arms, and I knew nothing more until I read of this horrible affair in the morning.
"Anything more that you would like to ask, Mr. Holmes?" said Lestrade, whose eyebrows had gone up once or twice during this remarkable explanation.
"I think I should like to have a word with you presently, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said he. "Now, Mr. McFarlane, two of my constables are at the door, and there is a four-wheeler waiting."
The wretched young man arose, and with a last beseeching glance at us walked from the room. The officers conducted him to the cab, but Lestrade remained.
Holmes had picked up the pages which formed the rough draft of the will, and was looking at them with the keenest interest upon his face.
I can read the first few lines and these in the middle of the second page, and one or two at the end.
Those are as clear as print," said he, "but the writing in between is very bad, and there are three places where I cannot read it at all."
That it was written in a train. The good writing represents stations, the bad writing movement, and the very bad writing passing over points.
A scientific expert would pronounce at once that this was drawn up on a suburban line, since nowhere save in the immediate vicinity of a great city could there be so quick a succession of points.
Granting that his whole journey was occupied in drawing up the will, then the train was an express, only stopping once between Norwood and London Bridge.
"You are too many for me when you begin to get on your theories, Mr. Holmes," said he. "How does this bear on the case?"
Well, it corroborates the young man's story to the extent that the will was drawn up by Jonas Oldacre in his journey yesterday.
It is curious-is it not?-that a man should draw up so important a document in so haphazard a fashion.
It suggests that he did not think it was going to be of much practical importance. If a man drew up a will which he did not intend ever to be effective, he might do it so.
Not clear? Well, if that isn't clear, what could be clearer? Here is a young man who learns suddenly that, if a certain older man dies, he will succeed to a fortune.
What does he do? He says nothing to anyone, but he arranges that he shall go out on some pretext to see his client that night.
He waits until the only other person in the house is in bed, and then in the solitude of a man's room he murders him, burns his body in the wood-pile, and departs to a neighbouring hotel.
And, finally, would you take the great pains to conceal the body, and yet leave your own stick as a sign that you were the criminal?
As to the stick, Mr. Holmes, you know as well as I do that a criminal is often flurried, and does such things, which a cool man would avoid.
"I could very easily give you half a dozen," said Holmes. "Here for example, is a very possible and even probable one.
I make you a free present of it. The older man is showing documents which are of evident value. A passing tramp sees them through the window, the blind of which is only half down.
Exit the solicitor. Enter the tramp! He seizes a stick, which he observes there, kills Oldacre, and departs after burning the body.
Lestrade shook his head, though it seemed to me that his manner was less absolutely assured than before.
Well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you may look for your tramp, and while you are finding him we will hold on to our man.
The future will show which is right. Just notice this point, Mr. Holmes: that so far as we know, none of the papers were removed, and that the prisoner is the one man in the world who had no reason for removing them, since he was heir-at-law, and would come into them in any case.
"I don't mean to deny that the evidence is in some ways very strongly in favour of your theory," said he.
I only wish to point out that there are other theories possible. As you say, the future will decide.
Good-morning! I dare say that in the course of the day I shall drop in at Norwood and see how you are getting on.
When the detective departed, my friend rose and made his preparations for the day's work with the alert air of a man who has a congenial task before him.
"My first movement Watson," said he, as he bustled into his frockcoat, "must, as I said, be in the direction of Blackheath."
Because we have in this case one singular incident coming close to the heels of another singular incident.
The police are making the mistake of concentrating their attention upon the second, because it happens to be the one which is actually criminal.
But it is evident to me that the logical way to approach the case is to begin by trying to throw some light upon the first incident-the curious will, so suddenly made, and to so unexpected an heir.
It may do something to simplify what followed. No, my dear fellow, I don't think you can help me. There is no prospect of danger, or I should not dream of stirring out without you.
I trust that when I see you in the evening, I will be able to report that I have been able to do something for this unfortunate youngster, who has thrown himself upon my protection.
It was late when my friend returned, and I could see, by a glance at his haggard and anxious face, that the high hopes with which he had started had not been fulfilled.
For an hour he droned away upon his violin, endeavouring to soothe his own ruffled spirits. At last he flung down the instrument, and plunged into a detailed account of his misadventures.
It's all going wrong, Watson-all as wrong as it can go. I kept a bold face before Lestrade, but, upon my soul, I believe that for once the fellow is on the right track and we are on the wrong.
All my instincts are one way, and all the facts are the other, and I much fear that British juries have not yet attained that pitch of intelligence when they will give the preference to my theories over Lestrade's facts.
"So, my dear Watson, there's my report of a failure. And yet-and yet-" he clenched his thin hands in a paroxysm of conviction-"I know it's all wrong.
I feel it in my bones. There is something that has not come out, and that housekeeper knows it. There was a sort of sulky defiance in her eyes, which only goes with guilty knowledge.
However, there's no good talking any more about it, Watson; but unless some lucky chance comes our way I fear that the Norwood Disappearance Case will not figure in that chronicle of our successes which I foresee that a patient public will sooner or later have to endure.
That is a dangerous argument my dear Watson. You remember that terrible murderer, Bert Stevens, who wanted us to get him off in '87?
By the way, there is one curious little point about those papers which may serve us as the starting-point for an inquiry.
On looking over the bank-book I found that the low state of the balance was principally due to large checks which have been made out during the last year to Mr. Cornelius.
I confess that I should be interested to know who this Mr. Cornelius may be with whom a retired builder has such very large transactions.
Is it possible that he has had a hand in the affair? Cornelius might be a broker, but we have found no scrip to correspond with these large payments.
Failing any other indication, my researches must now take the direction of an inquiry at the bank for the gentleman who has cashed these checks.
But I fear, my dear fellow, that our case will end ingloriously by Lestrade hanging our client, which will certainly be a triumph for Scotland Yard.
I do not know how far Sherlock Holmes took any sleep that night, but when I came down to breakfast I found him pale and harassed, his bright eyes the brighter for the dark shadows round them.
The carpet round his chair was littered with cigarette-ends and with the early editions of the morning papers.
Important fresh evidence to hand. McFarlane's guilt definitely established. Advise you to abandon case.-LESTRADE.
"It is Lestrade's little cock-a-doodle of victory," Holmes answered, with a bitter smile. "And yet it may be premature to abandon the case.
After all, important fresh evidence is a two-edged thing, and may possibly cut in a very different direction to that which Lestrade imagines.
Take your breakfast, Watson, and we will go out together and see what we can do. I feel as if I shall need your company and your moral support today.
"At present I cannot spare energy and nerve force for digestion," he would say in answer to my medical remonstrances.
I was not surprised, therefore, when this morning he left his untouched meal behind him, and started with me for Norwood.
A crowd of morbid sightseers were still gathered round Deep Dene House, which was just such a suburban villa as I had pictured.
But we formed ours yesterday, and now it proves to be correct, so you must acknowledge that we have been a little in front of you this time, Mr. Holmes.
"You don't like being beaten any more than the rest of us do," said he. "A man can't expect always to have it his own way, can he, Dr. Watson?
Step this way, if you please, gentlemen, and I think I can convince you once for all that it was John McFarlane who did this crime.
"This is where young McFarlane must have come out to get his hat after the crime was done," said he. "Now look at this."
With dramatic suddenness he struck a match, and by its light exposed a stain of blood upon the whitewashed wall.
As he held the match nearer, I saw that it was more than a stain. It was the well-marked print of a thumb.
Well, then, will you please compare that print with this wax impression of young McFarlane's right thumb, taken by my orders this morning?
As he held the waxen print close to the blood-stain, it did not take a magnifying glass to see that the two were undoubtedly from the same thumb.
Something in his tone caught my ear, and I turned to look at him. An extraordinary change had come over his face.
It was writhing with inward merriment. His two eyes were shining like stars. It seemed to me that he was making desperate efforts to restrain a convulsive attack of laughter.
"Dear me! Dear me!" he said at last. "Well, now, who would have thought it? And how deceptive appearances may be, to be sure!
Such a nice young man to look at! It is a lesson to us not to trust our own judgment, is it not, Lestrade?
"Yes, some of us are a little too much inclined to be cock-sure, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade. The man's insolence was maddening, but we could not resent it.
What a providential thing that this young man should press his right thumb against the wall in taking his hat from the peg!
Such a very natural action, too, if you come to think of it." Holmes was outwardly calm, but his whole body gave a wriggle of suppressed excitement as he spoke.
He remained on guard in the bedroom where the crime was committed, so as to see that nothing was touched.
Well, we had no particular reason to make a careful examination of the hall. Besides, it's not in a very prominent place, as you see.
Lestrade looked at Holmes as if he thought he was going out of his mind. I confess that I was myself surprised both at his hilarious manner and at his rather wild observation.
"I don't know whether you think that McFarlane came out of jail in the dead of the night in order to strengthen the evidence against himself," said Lestrade.
"There, that's enough," said Lestrade. "I am a practical man, Mr. Holmes, and when I have got my evidence I come to my conclusions.
Holmes had recovered his equanimity, though I still seemed to detect gleams of amusement in his expression.
"Dear me, this is a very sad development, Watson, is it not?" said he. "And yet there are singular points about it which hold out some hopes for our client."
I would hardly go so far as to say that, my dear Watson. The fact is that there is one really serious flaw in this evidence to which our friend attaches so much importance.
Only this: that I know that that mark was not there when I examined the hall yesterday. And now, Watson, let us have a little stroll round in the sunshine.
With a confused brain, but with a heart into which some warmth of hope was returning, I accompanied my friend in a walk round the garden.
Holmes took each face of the house in turn, and examined it with great interest. He then led the way inside, and went over the whole building from basement to attic.
Most of the rooms were unfurnished, but none the less Holmes inspected them all minutely. Finally, on the top corridor, which ran outside three untenanted bedrooms, he again was seized with a spasm of merriment.
"There are really some very unique features about this case, Watson," said he. "I think it is time now that we took our friend Lestrade into our confidence.
He has had his little smile at our expense, and perhaps we may do as much by him, if my reading of this problem proves to be correct.
Don't you think it may be a little premature? I can't help thinking that your evidence is not complete.
Lestrade knew my friend too well to disregard his words. He laid down his pen and looked curiously at him.
"Perhaps I can help you to see that and one or two other things as well," said Holmes. "Kindly summon your men, and I will try."
"In the outhouse you will find a considerable quantity of straw," said Holmes. "I will ask you to carry in two bundles of it.
I think it will be of the greatest assistance in producing the witness whom I require. Thank you very much.
I believe you have some matches in your pocket Watson. Now, Mr. Lestrade, I will ask you all to accompany me to the top landing.
Would you kindly send one of your constables for two buckets of water? Put the straw on the floor here, free from the wall on either side.
Lestrade's face had begun to grow red and angry. "I don't know whether you are playing a game with us, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said he.
I did so, and driven by the draught a coil of grey smoke swirled down the corridor, while the dry straw crackled and flamed.
Now we must see if we can find this witness for you, Lestrade. Might I ask you all to join in the cry of 'Fire!'?
It had hardly died away when an amazing thing happened. A door suddenly flew open out of what appeared to be solid wall at the end of the corridor, and a little, wizened man darted out of it, like a rabbit out of its burrow.
"Capital!" said Holmes, calmly. "Watson, a bucket of water over the straw. That will do! Lestrade, allow me to present you with your principal missing witness, Mr. Jonas Oldacre."
The detective stared at the newcomer with blank amazement. The latter was blinking in the bright light of the corridor, and peering at us and at the smouldering fire.
No harm? You have done your best to get an innocent man hanged. If it wasn't for this gentleman here, I am not sure that you would not have succeeded.
Oh! a joke, was it? You won't find the laugh on your side, I promise you. Take him down, and keep him in the sitting-room until I come.
You have saved an innocent man's life, and you have prevented a very grave scandal, which would have ruined my reputation in the Force.
Instead of being ruined, my good sir, you will find that your reputation has been enormously enhanced.
Just make a few alterations in that report which you were writing, and they will understand how hard it is to throw dust in the eyes of Inspector Lestrade.
Not at all. The work is its own reward. Perhaps I shall get the credit also at some distant day, when I permit my zealous historian to lay out his foolscap once more-eh, Watson?
A lath-and-plaster partition had been run across the passage six feet from the end, with a door cunningly concealed in it.
It was lit within by slits under the eaves. A few articles of furniture and a supply of food and water were within, together with a number of books and papers.
"There's the advantage of being a builder," said Holmes, as we came out. "He was able to fix up his own little hiding-place without any confederate-save, of course, that precious housekeeper of his, whom I should lose no time in adding to your bag, Lestrade."
I made up my mind that the fellow was in hiding in the house. When I paced one corridor and found it six feet shorter than the corresponding one below, it was pretty clear where he was.
I thought he had not the nerve to lie quiet before an alarm of fire. We could, of course, have gone in and taken him, but it amused me to make him reveal himself.
Well, sir, you certainly got equal with me on that. But how in the world did you know that he was in the house at all?
The thumb-mark, Lestrade. You said it was final; and so it was, in a very different sense. I knew it had not been there the day before.
I pay a good deal of attention to matters of detail, as you may have observed, and I had examined the hall, and was sure that the wall was clear.
Very simply. When those packets were sealed up, Jonas Oldacre got McFarlane to secure one of the seals by putting his thumb upon the soft wax.
It would be done so quickly and so naturally, that I daresay the young man himself has no recollection of it.
If you examine among those documents which he took with him into his retreat, I will lay you a wager that you find the seal with the thumb-mark upon it.
"Wonderful!" said Lestrade. "Wonderful! It's all as clear as crystal, as you put it. But what is the object of this deep deception, Mr.
It was amusing to me to see how the detective's overbearing manner had changed suddenly to that of a child asking questions of its teacher.
Well, I don't think that is very hard to explain. A very deep, malicious, vindictive person is the gentleman who is now waiting us downstairs.
You know that he was once refused by McFarlane's mother? You don't! I told you that you should go to Blackheath first and Norwood afterwards.
Well, this injury, as he would consider it, has rankled in his wicked, scheming brain, and all his life he has longed for vengeance, but never seen his chance.
During the last year or two, things have gone against him-secret speculation, I think-and he finds himself in a bad way.
He determines to swindle his creditors, and for this purpose he pays large checks to a certain Mr. Cornelius, who is, I imagine, himself under another name.
I have not traced these checks yet, but I have no doubt that they were banked under that name at some provincial town where Oldacre from time to time led a double existence.
He intended to change his name altogether, draw this money, and vanish, starting life again elsewhere.
It was a net from which it seemed to me, a few hours ago, that there was no possible escape. But he had not that supreme gift of the artist, the knowledge of when to stop.
He wished to improve that which was already perfect-to draw the rope tighter yet round the neck of his unfortunate victim-and so he ruined all.
"That's for a jury to decide," said Lestrade. "Anyhow, we shall have you on a charge of conspiracy, if not for attempted murder."
"And you'll probably find that your creditors will impound the banking account of Mr. Cornelius," said Holmes.
"I fancy that, for some few years, you will find your time very fully occupied," said he. "By the way, what was it you put into the wood-pile besides your old trousers?
A dead dog, or rabbits, or what? You won't tell? Dear me, how very unkind of you! Well, well, I daresay that a couple of rabbits would account both for the blood and for the charred ashes.
Holmes had been seated for some hours in silence with his long, thin back curved over a chemical vessel in which he was brewing a particularly malodorous product.
His head was sunk upon his breast, and he looked from my point of view like a strange, lank bird, with dull grey plumage and a black top-knot.
I gave a start of astonishment. Accustomed as I was to Holmes's curious faculties, this sudden intrusion into my most intimate thoughts was utterly inexplicable.
He wheeled round upon his stool, with a steaming test-tube in his hand, and a gleam of amusement in his deep-set eyes.
Now, it was not really difficult, by an inspection of the groove between your left forefinger and thumb, to feel sure that you did not propose to invest your small capital in the gold fields.
Very likely not; but I can quickly show you a close connection. Here are the missing links of the very simple chain: 1.
You had chalk between your left finger and thumb when you returned from the club last night. 2. You put chalk there when you play billiards, to steady the cue.
"Quite so!" said he, a little nettled. "Every problem becomes very childish when once it is explained to you.
Here is an unexplained one. See what you can make of that, friend Watson." He tossed a sheet of paper upon the table, and turned once more to his chemical analysis.
That is what Mr. Hilton Cubitt, of Riding Thorpe Manor, Norfolk, is very anxious to know. This little conundrum came by the first post, and he was to follow by the next train.
He seemed to bring a whiff of his strong, fresh, bracing, east-coast air with him as he entered. Having shaken hands with each of us, he was about to sit down, when his eye rested upon the paper with the curious markings, which I had just examined and left upon the table.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, what do you make of these?" he cried. "They told me that you were fond of queer mysteries, and I don't think you can find a queerer one than that.
"It is certainly rather a curious production," said Holmes. "At first sight it would appear to be some childish prank.
It consists of a number of absurd little figures dancing across the paper upon which they are drawn. Why should you attribute any importance to so grotesque an object?
I never should, Mr. Holmes. But my wife does. It is frightening her to death. She says nothing, but I can see terror in her eyes.
Holmes held up the paper so that the sunlight shone full upon it. It was a page torn from a notebook.
They were scrawled with chalk. I thought that it was the stable-boy who had drawn them, but the lad swore he knew nothing about it.
Anyhow, they had come there during the night. I had them washed out, and I only mentioned the matter to my wife afterwards.
I showed it to Elsie, and down she dropped in a dead faint. Since then she has looked like a woman in a dream, half dazed, and with terror always lurking in her eyes.
It was then that I wrote and sent the paper to you, Mr. Holmes. It was not a thing that I could take to the police, for they would have laughed at me, but you will tell me what to do.
I am not a rich man, but if there is any danger threatening my little woman, I would spend my last copper to shield her.
He was a fine creature, this man of the old English soil-simple, straight, and gentle, with his great, earnest blue eyes and broad, comely face.
His love for his wife and his trust in her shone in his features. Holmes had listened to his story with the utmost attention, and now he sat for some time in silent thought.
"Don't you think, Mr. Cubitt," said he, at last, "that your best plan would be to make a direct appeal to your wife, and to ask her to share her secret with you?"
A promise is a promise, Mr. Holmes. If Elsie wished to tell me she would. If not, it is not for me to force her confidence.
Then I will help you with all my heart. In the first place, have you heard of any strangers being seen in your neighbourhood?
In the immediate neighbourhood, yes. But we have several small watering-places not very far away. And the farmers take in lodgers.
These hieroglyphics have evidently a meaning. If it is a purely arbitrary one, it may be impossible for us to solve it.
I would suggest that you return to Norfolk, that you keep a keen lookout, and that you take an exact copy of any fresh dancing men which may appear.
It is a thousand pities that we have not a reproduction of those which were done in chalk upon the window-sill.
Make a discreet inquiry also as to any strangers in the neighbourhood. When you have collected some fresh evidence, come to me again.
That is the best advice which I can give you, Mr. Hilton Cubitt. If there are any pressing fresh developments, I shall be always ready to run down and see you in your Norfolk home.
He made no allusion to the affair, however, until one afternoon a fortnight or so later. I was going out when he called me back.
Because I had a wire from Hilton Cubitt this morning. You remember Hilton Cubitt, of the dancing men?
He was to reach Liverpool Street at one-twenty. He may be here at any moment. I gather from his wire that there have been some new incidents of importance.
We had not long to wait, for our Norfolk squire came straight from the station as fast as a hansom could bring him.
"It's getting on my nerves, this business, Mr. Holmes," said he, as he sank, like a wearied man, into an armchair.
No, Mr. Holmes, she has not. And yet there have been times when the poor girl has wanted to speak, and yet could not quite bring herself to take the plunge.
I have tried to help her, but I daresay I did it clumsily, and scared her from it. She has spoken about my old family, and our reputation in the county, and our pride in our unsullied honour, and I always felt it was leading to the point, but somehow it turned off before we got there.
A good deal, Mr. Holmes. I have several fresh dancing-men pictures for you to examine, and, what is more important, I have seen the fellow.
Yes, I saw him at his work. But I will tell you everything in order. When I got back after my visit to you, the very first thing I saw next morning was a fresh crop of dancing men.
They had been drawn in chalk upon the black wooden door of the tool-house, which stands beside the lawn in full view of the front windows.
I took an exact copy, and here it is." He unfolded a paper and laid it upon the table. Here is a copy of the hieroglyphics:
When I had taken the copy, I rubbed out the marks, but, two mornings later, a fresh inscription had appeared.
Suddenly, as she spoke, I saw her white face grow whiter yet in the moonlight, and her hand tightened upon my shoulder.
Something was moving in the shadow of the tool-house. I saw a dark, creeping figure which crawled round the corner and squatted in front of the door.
Seizing my pistol, I was rushing out, when my wife threw her arms round me and held me with convulsive strength.
I tried to throw her off, but she clung to me most desperately. At last I got clear, but by the time I had opened the door and reached the house the creature was gone.
He had left a trace of his presence, however, for there on the door was the very same arrangement of dancing men which had already twice appeared, and which I have copied on that paper.
There was no other sign of the fellow anywhere, though I ran all over the grounds. And yet the amazing thing is that he must have been there all the time, for when I examined the door again in the morning, he had scrawled some more of his pictures under the line which I had already seen.
"Tell me," said Holmes-and I could see by his eyes that he was much excited-"was this a mere addition to the first or did it appear to be entirely separate?"
Excellent! This is far the most important of all for our purpose. It fills me with hopes. Now, Mr. Hilton Cubitt, please continue your most interesting statement.
I have nothing more to say, Mr. Holmes, except that I was angry with my wife that night for having held me back when I might have caught the skulking rascal.
But there is a tone in my wife's voice, Mr. Holmes, and a look in her eyes which forbid doubt, and I am sure that it was indeed my own safety that was in her mind.
There's the whole case, and now I want your advice as to what I ought to do. My own inclination is to put half a dozen of my farm lads in the shrubbery, and when this fellow comes again to give him such a hiding that he will leave us in peace for the future.
"I fear it is too deep a case for such simple remedies," said Holmes. "How long can you stay in London?"
I must go back to-day. I would not leave my wife alone all night for anything. She is very nervous, and begged me to come back.
I daresay you are right. But if you could have stopped, I might possibly have been able to return with you in a day or two.
Meanwhile you will leave me these papers, and I think that it is very likely that I shall be able to pay you a visit shortly and to throw some light upon your case.
Sherlock Holmes preserved his calm professional manner until our visitor had left us, although it was easy for me, who knew him so well, to see that he was profoundly excited.
For two hours I watched him as he covered sheet after sheet of paper with figures and letters, so completely absorbed in his task that he had evidently forgotten my presence.
Sometimes he was making progress and whistled and sang at his work; sometimes he was puzzled, and would sit for long spells with a furrowed brow and a vacant eye.
Finally he sprang from his chair with a cry of satisfaction, and walked up and down the room rubbing his hands together.
Then he wrote a long telegram upon a cable form. "If my answer to this is as I hope, you will have a very pretty case to add to your collection, Watson," said he.
I expect that we shall be able to go down to Norfolk tomorrow, and to take our friend some very definite news as to the secret of his annoyance.
I confess that I was filled with curiosity, but I was aware that Holmes liked to make his disclosures at his own time and in his own way, so I waited until it should suit him to take me into his confidence.
But there was a delay in that answering telegram, and two days of impatience followed, during which Holmes pricked up his ears at every ring of the bell.
On the evening of the second there came a letter from Hilton Cubitt. All was quiet with him, save that a long inscription had appeared that morning upon the pedestal of the sundial.
Holmes bent over this grotesque frieze for some minutes, and then suddenly sprang to his feet with an exclamation of surprise and dismay.
"Then we shall breakfast early and take the very first in the morning," said Holmes. "Our presence is most urgently needed.
Ah! here is our expected cablegram. One moment, Mrs. Hudson, there may be an answer. No, that is quite as I expected.
This message makes it even more essential that we should not lose an hour in letting Hilton Cubitt know how matters stand, for it is a singular and a dangerous web in which our simple Norfolk squire is entangled.
So, indeed, it proved, and as I come to the dark conclusion of a story which had seemed to me to be only childish and bizarre, I experience once again the dismay and horror with which I was filled.
Would that I had some brighter ending to communicate to my readers, but these are the chronicles of fact, and I must follow to their dark crisis the strange chain of events which for some days made Riding Thorpe Manor a household word through the length and breadth of England.
We had hardly alighted at North Walsham, and mentioned the name of our destination, when the station-master hurried towards us.
Because Inspector Martin from Norwich has just passed through. But maybe you are the surgeons. She's not dead-or wasn't by last accounts.
"We are going to Riding Thorpe Manor," said he, "but we have heard nothing of what has passed there."
"It's a terrible business," said the stationmaster. "They are shot, both Mr. Hilton Cubitt and his wife.
She shot him and then herself-so the servants say. He's dead and her life is despaired of. Dear, dear, one of the oldest families in the county of Norfolk, and one of the most honoured.
Without a word Holmes hurried to a carriage, and during the long seven miles' drive he never opened his mouth.
As we drove up to the porticoed front door, I observed in front of it, beside the tennis lawn, the black tool-house and the pedestalled sundial with which we had such strange associations.
A dapper little man, with a quick, alert manner and a waxed moustache, had just descended from a high dog-cart.
He introduced himself as Inspector Martin, of the Norfolk Constabulary, and he was considerably astonished when he heard the name of my companion.
Why, Mr. Holmes, the crime was only committed at three this morning. How could you hear of it in London and get to the spot as soon as I?
Then you must have important evidence, of which we are ignorant, for they were said to be a most united couple.
In that case I should be glad to hear the evidence and to examine the premises without an instant of unnecessary delay.
Inspector Martin had the good sense to allow my friend to do things in his own fashion, and contented himself with carefully noting the results.
The local surgeon, an old, white-haired man, had just come down from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt's room, and he reported that her injuries were serious, but not necessarily fatal.
The bullet had passed through the front of her brain, and it would probably be some time before she could regain consciousness.
On the question of whether she had been shot or had shot herself, he would not venture to express any decided opinion.
Certainly the bullet had been discharged at very close quarters. There was only the one pistol found in the room, two barrels of which had been emptied.
Mr. Hilton Cubitt had been shot through the heart. It was equally conceivable that he had shot her and then himself, or that she had been the criminal, for the revolver lay upon the floor midway between them.
The old hall, oak-panelled and high-windowed, had been turned into a court of investigation. Holmes sat in a great, old-fashioned chair, his inexorable eyes gleaming out of his haggard face.
I could read in them a set purpose to devote his life to this quest until the client whom he had failed to save should at last be avenged.
The trim Inspector Martin, the old, grey-headed country doctor, myself, and a stolid village policeman made up the rest of that strange company.
The two women told their story clearly enough. They had been aroused from their sleep by the sound of an explosion, which had been followed a minute later by a second one.
They slept in adjoining rooms, and Mrs. King had rushed in to Saunders. Together they had descended the stairs.
The door of the study was open, and a candle was burning upon the table. Their master lay upon his face in the centre of the room.
He was quite dead. Near the window his wife was crouching, her head leaning against the wall. She was horribly wounded, and the side of her face was red with blood.
She breathed heavily, but was incapable of saying anything. The passage, as well as the room, was full of smoke and the smell of powder.
The window was certainly shut and fastened upon the inside. Both women were positive upon the point. They had at once sent for the doctor and for the constable.
Then, with the aid of the groom and the stable-boy, they had conveyed their injured mistress to her room.
Both she and her husband had occupied the bed. She was clad in her dress-he in his dressing-gown, over his night-clothes.
Nothing had been moved in the study. So far as they knew, there had never been any quarrel between husband and wife.
These were the main points of the servants' evidence. In answer to Inspector Martin, they were clear that every door was fastened upon the inside, and that no one could have escaped from the house.
In answer to Holmes, they both remembered that they were conscious of the smell of powder from the moment that they ran out of their rooms upon the top floor.
"I commend that fact very carefully to your attention," said Holmes to his professional colleague. "And now I think that we are in a position to undertake a thorough examination of the room."
The study proved to be a small chamber, lined on three sides with books, and with a writing-table facing an ordinary window, which looked out upon the garden.
Our first attention was given to the body of the unfortunate squire, whose huge frame lay stretched across the room.
His disordered dress showed that he had been hastily aroused from sleep. The bullet had been fired at him from the front, and had remained in his body, after penetrating the heart.
His death had certainly been instantaneous and painless. There was no powder-marking either upon his dressing-gown or on his hands.
I would suggest that Mr. Cubitt's body may now be removed. I suppose, Doctor, you have not recovered the bullet which wounded the lady?
A serious operation will be necessary before that can be done. But there are still four cartridges in the revolver.
"So it would seem," said Holmes. "Perhaps you can account also for the bullet which has so obviously struck the edge of the window?"
He had turned suddenly, and his long, thin finger was pointing to a hole which had been drilled right through the lower window-sash, about an inch above the bottom.
"Wonderful!" said the country doctor. "You are certainly right, sir. Then a third shot has been fired, and therefore a third person must have been present.
"That is the problem which we are now about to solve," said Sherlock Holmes. "You remember, Inspector Martin, when the servants said that on leaving their room they were at once conscious of a smell of powder, I remarked that the point was an extremely important one?"
It suggested that at the time of the firing, the window as well as the door of the room had been open.
Otherwise the fumes of powder could not have been blown so rapidly through the house. A draught in the room was necessary for that.
Feeling sure that the window had been open at the time of the tragedy, I conceived that there might have been a third person in the affair, who stood outside this opening and fired through it.
Any shot directed at this person might hit the sash. I looked, and there, sure enough, was the bullet mark!
It was a lady's hand-bag which stood upon the study table-a trim little handbag of crocodile-skin and silver.
Holmes opened it and turned the contents out. There were twenty fifty-pound notes of the Bank of England, held together by an india-rubber band-nothing else.
"This must be preserved, for it will figure in the trial," said Holmes, as he handed the bag with its contents to the inspector.
It is now necessary that we should try to throw some light upon this third bullet, which has clearly, from the splintering of the wood, been fired from inside the room.
I should like to see Mrs. King, the cook, again. You said, Mrs. King, that you were awakened by a loud explosion.
I believe that it was undoubtedly so. I rather think, Inspector Martin, that we have now exhausted all that this room can teach us.
A flower-bed extended up to the study window, and we all broke into an exclamation as we approached it.
The flowers were trampled down, and the soft soil was imprinted all over with footmarks. Large, masculine feet they were, with peculiarly long, sharp toes.
Holmes hunted about among the grass and leaves like a retriever after a wounded bird. Then, with a cry of satisfaction, he bent forward and picked up a little brazen cylinder.
"I thought so," said he, "the revolver had an ejector, and here is the third cartridge. I really think, Inspector Martin, that our case is almost complete."
The country inspector's face had shown his intense amazement at the rapid and masterful progress of Holmes's investigation.
At first he had shown some disposition to assert his own position, but now he was overcome with admiration, and ready to follow without question wherever Holmes led.
I'll go into that later. There are several points in this problem which I have not been able to explain to you yet.
Now that I have got so far, I had best proceed on my own lines, and then clear the whole matter up once and for all.
I have no desire to make mysteries, but it is impossible at the moment of action to enter into long and complex explanations.
I have the threads of this affair all in my hand. Even if this lady should never recover consciousness, we can still reconstruct the events of last night and insure that justice be done.
The servants were cross-questioned, but none of them had heard of such a place. The stable-boy threw a light upon the matter by remembering that a farmer of that name lived some miles off, in the direction of East Ruston.
He took from his pocket the various slips of the dancing men. With these in front of him, he worked for some time at the study-table.
Finally he handed a note to the boy, with directions to put it into the hands of the person to whom it was addressed, and especially to answer no questions of any sort which might be put to him.
I saw the outside of the note, addressed in straggling, irregular characters, very unlike Holmes's usual precise hand.
The boy who takes this note could no doubt forward your telegram. If there is an afternoon train to town, Watson, I think we should do well to take it, as I have a chemical analysis of some interest to finish, and this investigation draws rapidly to a close.
When the youth had been dispatched with the note, Sherlock Holmes gave his instructions to the servants.
If any visitor were to call asking for Mrs. Hilton Cubitt, no information should be given as to her condition, but he was to be shown at once into the drawing-room.
I had so many letters now that I could proceed with considerable confidence to the second message, which worked out in this fashion:
Inspector Martin and I had listened with the utmost interest to the full and clear account of how my friend had produced results which had led to so complete a command over our difficulties.
"It is a privilege to be associated with you in the handling of a case," said the inspector, warmly. "You will excuse me, however, if I speak frankly to you.
You are only answerable to yourself, but I have to answer to my superiors. If this Abe Slaney, living at Elrige's, is indeed the murderer, and if he has made his escape while I am seated here, I should certainly get into serious trouble.
But this is incredible, Mr. Holmes! Why should he come because you have asked him? Would not such a request rather rouse his suspicions and cause him to fly?
"I think I have known how to frame the letter," said Sherlock Holmes. "In fact, if I am not very much mistaken, here is the gentleman himself coming up the drive."
He swaggered up a path as if the place belonged to him, and we heard his loud, confident peal at the bell.
"I think, gentlemen," said Holmes, quietly, "that we had best take up our position behind the door. Every precaution is necessary when dealing with such a fellow.
We waited in silence for a minute-one of those minutes which one can never forget. Then the door opened and the man stepped in.
He glared from one to the other of us with a pair of blazing black eyes. Then he burst into a bitter laugh.
Well, gentlemen, you have the drop on me this time. I seem to have knocked up against something hard.
But I came here in answer to a letter from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt. Don't tell me that she is in this? Don't tell me that she helped to set a trap for me?
"You're crazy!" he cried, fiercely. "It was he that was hurt, not she. Who would have hurt little Elsie?
I may have threatened her-God forgive me!-but I would not have touched a hair of her pretty head. Take it back-you!
He sank with a deep groan on the settee and buried his face in his manacled hands. For five minutes he was silent.
"I have nothing to hide from you, gentlemen," said he. "If I shot the man he had his shot at me, and there's no murder in that.
But if you think I could have hurt that woman, then you don't know either me or her. I tell you, there was never a man in this world loved a woman more than I loved her.
I had a right to her. She was pledged to me years ago. Who was this Englishman that he should come between us?
"She broke away from your influence when she found the man that you are," said Holmes, sternly. "She fled from America to avoid you, and she married an honourable gentleman in England.
You dogged her and followed her and made her life a misery to her, in order to induce her to abandon the husband whom she loved and respected in order to fly with you, whom she feared and hated.
You have ended by bringing about the death of a noble man and driving his wife to suicide. That is your record in this business, Mr. Abe Slaney, and you will answer for it to the law.
You wrote it? There was no one on earth outside the Joint who knew the secret of the dancing men. How came you to write it?
"What one man can invent another can discover," said Holmes. "There is a cab coming to convey you to Norwich, Mr. Slaney.
The least that you owe her is to make it clear to the whole world that she was in no way, directly or indirectly, responsible for his tragic end.
"I ask nothing better," said the American. "I guess the very best case I can make for myself is the absolute naked truth."
"It is my duty to warn you that it will be used against you," cried the inspector, with the magnificent fair play of the British criminal law.
Well, I have been here a month now. I lived in that farm, where I had a room down below, and could get in and out every night, and no one the wiser.
I tried all I could to coax Elsie away. I knew that she read the messages, for once she wrote an answer under one of them.
She said that she would come down when her husband was asleep at three in the morning, and speak with me through the end window, if I would go away afterwards and leave her in peace.
She came down and brought money with her, trying to bribe me to go. This made me mad, and I caught her arm and tried to pull her through the window.
At that moment in rushed the husband with his revolver in his hand. Elsie had sunk down upon the floor, and we were face to face.
I was heeled also, and I held up my gun to scare him off and let me get away. He fired and missed me.
I pulled off almost at the same instant, and down he dropped. I made away across the garden, and as I went I heard the window shut behind me.
That's God's truth, gentlemen, every word of it, and I heard no more about it until that lad came riding up with a note which made me walk in here, like a jay, and give myself into your hands.
A cab had driven up whilst the American had been talking. Two uniformed policemen sat inside. Inspector Martin rose and touched his prisoner on the shoulder.
No, she is not conscious. Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I only hope that if ever again I have an important case, I shall have the good fortune to have you by my side.
We stood at the window and watched the cab drive away. As I turned back, my eye caught the pellet of paper which the prisoner had tossed upon the table.
"If you use the code which I have explained," said Holmes, "you will find that it simply means 'Come here at once.'
I was convinced that it was an invitation which he would not refuse, since he could never imagine that it could come from anyone but the lady.
Of Mrs. Hilton Cubitt I only know that I have heard she recovered entirely, and that she still remains a widow, devoting her whole life to the care of the poor and to the administration of her husband's estate.
Many startling successes and a few unavoidable failures were the outcome of this long period of continuous work.
It is true that the circumstance did not admit of any striking illustration of those powers for which my friend was famous, but there were some points about the case which made it stand out in those long records of crime from which I gather the material for these little narratives.
On referring to my notebook for the year 1895, I find that it was upon Saturday, the 23rd of April, that we first heard of Miss Violet Smith.
My friend, who loved above all things precision and concentration of thought, resented anything which distracted his attention from the matter in hand.
With a resigned air and a somewhat weary smile, Holmes begged the beautiful intruder to take a seat, and to inform us what it was that was troubling her.
"At least it cannot be your health," said he, as his keen eyes darted over her, "so ardent a bicyclist must be full of energy."
She glanced down in surprise at her own feet, and I observed the slight roughening of the side of the sole caused by the friction of the edge of the pedal.
My friend took the lady's ungloved hand, and examined it with as close an attention and as little sentiment as a scientist would show to a specimen.
"You will excuse me, I am sure. It is my business," said he, as he dropped it. "I nearly fell into the error of supposing that you were typewriting.
Of course, it is obvious that it is music. You observe the spatulate finger-ends, Watson, which is common to both professions?
There is a spirituality about the face, however"-she gently turned it towards the light-"which the typewriter does not generate.
A beautiful neighbourhood, and full of the most interesting associations. You remember, Watson, that it was near there that we took Archie Stamford, the forger.
My father is dead, Mr. Holmes. He was James Smith, who conducted the orchestra at the old Imperial Theatre.
My mother and I were left without a relation in the world except one uncle, Ralph Smith, who went to Africa twenty-five years ago, and we have never had a word from him since.
When father died, we were left very poor, but one day we were told that there was an advertisement in _The Times_, inquiring for our whereabouts.
You can imagine how excited we were, for we thought that someone had left us a fortune. We went at once to the lawyer whose name was given in the paper.
There we met two gentlemen, Mr. Carruthers and Mr. Woodley, who were home on a visit from South Africa.
It seemed strange to us that Uncle Ralph, who took no notice of us when he was alive, should be so careful to look after us when he was dead, but Mr. Carruthers explained that the reason was that my uncle had just heard of the death of his brother, and so felt responsible for our fate.
Mr. Woodley seemed to me to be a most odious person. He was for ever making eyes at me-a coarse, puffy-faced, red-moustached young man, with his hair plastered down on each side of his forehead.
I thought that he was perfectly hateful-and I was sure that Cyril would not wish me to know such a person.
The horse and trap were to have come this week, but for some reason they were not delivered, and again I had to cycle to the station.
That was this morning. You can think that I looked out when I came to Charlington Heath, and there, sure enough, was the man, exactly as he had been the two weeks before.
He always kept so far from me that I could not clearly see his face, but it was certainly someone whom I did not know.
He was dressed in a dark suit with a cloth cap. The only thing about his face that I could clearly see was his dark beard.
To-day I was not alarmed, but I was filled with curiosity, and I determined to find out who he was and what he wanted.
I slowed down my machine, but he slowed down his. Then I stopped altogether, but he stopped also. Then I laid a trap for him.
There is a sharp turning of the road, and I pedalled very quickly round this, and then I stopped and waited.
I expected him to shoot round and pass me before he could stop. But he never appeared. Then I went back and looked round the corner.
I could see a mile of road, but he was not on it. To make it the more extraordinary, there was no side road at this point down which he could have gone.
Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "This case certainly presents some features of its own," said he.
So, by the process of exclusion, we arrive at the fact that he made his way toward Charlington Hall, which, as I understand, is situated in its own grounds on one side of the road.
Nothing, Mr. Holmes, save that I was so perplexed that I felt I should not be happy until I had seen you and had your advice.
Oh, it may be a mere fancy of mine; but it had seemed to me sometimes that my employer, Mr. Carruthers, takes a great deal of interest in me.
We are thrown rather together. I play his accompaniments in the evening. He has never said anything. He is a perfect gentleman.
Well, at least he is fairly well-to-do. But he goes into the city two or three times a week. He is deeply interested in South African gold shares.
You will let me know any fresh development, Miss Smith. I am very busy just now, but I will find time to make some inquiries into your case.
In the meantime, take no step without letting me know. Good-bye, and I trust that we shall have nothing but good news from you.
"It is part of the settled order of Nature that such a girl should have followers," said Holmes, he pulled at his meditative pipe, "but for choice not on bicycles in lonely country roads.
Some secretive lover, beyond all doubt. But there are curious and suggestive details about the case, Watson.
No, my dear fellow, you will go down. This may be some trifling intrigue, and I cannot break my other important research for the sake of it.
On Monday you will arrive early at Farnham; you will conceal yourself near Charlington Heath; you will observe these facts for yourself, and act as your own judgment advises.
Then, having inquired as to the occupants of the Hall, you will come back to me and report. And now, Watson, not another word of the matter until we have a few solid stepping-stones on which we may hope to get across to our solution.
We had ascertained from the lady that she went down upon the Monday by the train which leaves Waterloo at 9:50, so I started early and caught the 9:13.
The heath was covered with golden patches of flowering gorse, gleaming magnificently in the light of the bright spring sunshine.
Behind one of these clumps I took up my position, so as to command both the gateway of the Hall and a long stretch of the road upon either side.
It had been deserted when I left it, but now I saw a cyclist riding down it from the opposite direction to that in which I had come.
He was clad in a dark suit, and I saw that he had a black beard. On reaching the end of the Charlington grounds, he sprang from his machine and led it through a gap in the hedge, disappearing from my view.
A quarter of an hour passed, and then a second cyclist appeared. This time it was the young lady coming from the station.
I saw her look about her as she came to the Charlington hedge. An instant later the man emerged from his hiding-place, sprang upon his cycle, and followed her.
She looked back at him and slowed her pace. He slowed also. She stopped. He at once stopped, too, keeping two hundred yards behind her.
Her next movement was as unexpected as it was spirited. She suddenly whisked her wheels round and dashed straight at him.
I remained in my hiding-place, and it was well that I did so, for presently the man reappeared, cycling slowly back.
He turned in at the Hall gates, and dismounted from his machine. For some minutes I could see him standing among the trees.
His hands were raised, and he seemed to be settling his necktie. Then he mounted his cycle, and rode away from me down the drive towards the Hall.
I ran across the heath and peered through the trees. Far away I could catch glimpses of the old grey building with its bristling Tudor chimneys, but the drive ran through a dense shrubbery, and I saw no more of my man.
However, it seemed to me that I had done a fairly good morning's work, and I walked back in high spirits to Farnham.
The local house agent could tell me nothing about Charlington Hall, and referred me to a well-known firm in Pall Mall.
There I halted on my way home, and met with courtesy from the representative. No, I could not have Charlington Hall for the summer.
I was just too late. It had been let about a month ago. Mr. Williamson was the name of the tenant. He was a respectable, elderly gentleman.
The polite agent was afraid he could say no more, as the affairs of his clients were not matters which he could discuss.
On the contrary, his austere face was even more severe than usual as he commented upon the things that I had done and the things that I had not.
Your hiding-place, my dear Watson, was very faulty. You should have been behind the hedge, then you would have had a close view of this interesting person.
As it is, you were some hundreds of yards away and can tell me even less than Miss Smith. She thinks she does not know the man; I am convinced she does.
Why, otherwise, should he be so desperately anxious that she should not get so near him as to see his features?
You describe him as bending over the handle-bar. Concealment again, you see. You really have done remarkably badly.
Gone to the nearest public-house. That is the centre of country gossip. They would have told you every name, from the master to the scullery-maid.
Williamson? It conveys nothing to my mind. If he is an elderly man he is not this active cyclist who sprints away from that young lady's athletic pursuit.
What have we gained by your expedition? The knowledge that the girl's story is true. I never doubted it.
That there is a connection between the cyclist and the Hall. I never doubted that either. That the Hall is tenanted by Williamson.
Who's the better for that? Well, well, my dear sir, don't look so depressed. We can do little more until next Saturday, and in the meantime I may make one or two inquiries myself.
Next morning, we had a note from Miss Smith, recounting shortly and accurately the very incidents which I had seen, but the pith of the letter lay in the postscript:
I am sure that you will respect my confidence, Mr. Holmes, when I tell you that my place here has become difficult, owing to the fact that my employer has proposed marriage to me.
I am convinced that his feelings are most deep and most honourable. At the same time, my promise is of course given.
He took my refusal very seriously, but also very gently. You can understand, however, that the situation is a little strained.
"Our young friend seems to be getting into deep waters," said Holmes, thoughtfully, as he finished the letter.
The case certainly presents more features of interest and more possibility of development than I had originally thought.
I should be none the worse for a quiet, peaceful day in the country, and I am inclined to run down this afternoon and test one or two theories which I have formed.
"I get so little active exercise that it is always a treat," said he. "You are aware that I have some proficiency in the good old British sport of boxing.
Occasionally, it is of service; to-day, for example, I should have come to very ignominious grief without it.
I found that country pub which I had already recommended to your notice, and there I made my discreet inquiries.
I was in the bar, and a garrulous landlord was giving me all that I wanted. Williamson is a white-bearded man, and he lives alone with a small staff of servants at the Hall.
There is some rumour that he is or has been a clergyman, but one or two incidents of his short residence at the Hall struck me as peculiarly unecclesiastical.
I have already made some inquiries at a clerical agency, and they tell me that there was a man of that name in orders, whose career has been a singularly dark one.
The landlord further informed me that there are usually week-end visitors-'a warm lot, sir'-at the Hall, and especially one gentleman with a red moustache, Mr. Woodley by name, who was always there.
We had got as far as this, when who should walk in but the gentleman himself, who had been drinking his beer in the tap-room and had heard the whole conversation.
Who was I? What did I want? What did I mean by asking questions? He had a fine flow of language, and his adjectives were very vigorous.
He ended a string of abuse by a vicious backhander, which I failed to entirely avoid. The next few minutes were delicious.
It was a straight left against a slogging ruffian. I emerged as you see me. Mr. Woodley went home in a cart.
So ended my country trip, and it must be confessed that, however enjoyable, my day on the Surrey border has not been much more profitable than your own.
You will not be surprised, Mr. Holmes (said she), to hear that I am leaving Mr. Carruthers's employment.
Even the high pay cannot reconcile me to the discomforts of my situation. On Saturday I come up to town, and I do not intend to return.
Mr. Carruthers has got a trap, and so the dangers of the lonely road, if there ever were any dangers, are now over.
As to the special cause of my leaving, it is not merely the strained situation with Mr. Carruthers, but it is the reappearance of that odious man, Mr. Woodley.
He was always hideous, but he looks more awful than ever now, for he appears to have had an accident and he is much disfigured.
I saw him out of the window, but I am glad to say I did not meet him. He had a long talk with Mr. Carruthers, who seemed much excited afterwards.
Woodley must be staying in the neighbourhood, for he did not sleep here, and yet I caught a glimpse of him again this morning, slinking about in the shrubbery.
I would sooner have a savage wild animal loose about the place. I loathe and fear him more than I can say.
How can Mr. Carruthers endure such a creature for a moment? However, all my troubles will be over on Saturday.
"So I trust, Watson, so I trust," said Holmes, gravely. "There is some deep intrigue going on round that little woman, and it is our duty to see that no one molests her upon that last journey.
I think, Watson, that we must spare time to run down together on Saturday morning and make sure that this curious and inclusive investigation has no untoward ending.
I confess that I had not up to now taken a very serious view of the case, which had seemed to me rather grotesque and bizarre than dangerous.
The ruffian Woodley was a very different person, but, except on one occasion, he had not molested our client, and now he visited the house of Carruthers without intruding upon her presence.
The man on the bicycle was doubtless a member of those week-end parties at the Hall of which the publican had spoken, but who he was, or what he wanted, was as obscure as ever.
It was the severity of Holmes's manner and the fact that he slipped a revolver into his pocket before leaving our rooms which impressed me with the feeling that tragedy might prove to lurk behind this curious train of events.
Holmes and I walked along the broad, sandy road inhaling the fresh morning air and rejoicing in the music of the birds and the fresh breath of the spring.
Holmes pointed down the long tract of road which wound, a reddish yellow band, between the brown of the heath and the budding green of the woods.
Far away, a black dot, we could see a vehicle moving in our direction. Holmes gave an exclamation of impatience.
"I have given a margin of half an hour," said he. "If that is her trap, she must be making for the earlier train.
From the instant that we passed the rise, we could no longer see the vehicle, but we hastened onward at such a pace that my sedentary life began to tell upon me, and I was compelled to fall behind.
Holmes, however, was always in training, for he had inexhaustible stores of nervous energy upon which to draw.
His springy step never slowed until suddenly, when he was a hundred yards in front of me, he halted, and I saw him throw up his hand with a gesture of grief and despair.
At the same instant an empty dog-cart, the horse cantering, the reins trailing, appeared round the curve of the road and rattled swiftly towards us.
"Too late, Watson, too late!" cried Holmes, as I ran panting to his side. "Fool that I was not to allow for that earlier train!
It's abduction, Watson-abduction! Murder! Heaven knows what! Block the road! Stop the horse! That's right.
We had sprung into the dog-cart, and Holmes, after turning the horse, gave it a sharp cut with the whip, and we flew back along the road.
As we turned the curve, the whole stretch of road between the Hall and the heath was opened up. I grasped Holmes's arm.
A solitary cyclist was coming towards us. His head was down and his shoulders rounded, as he put every ounce of energy that he possessed on to the pedals.
He was flying like a racer. Suddenly he raised his bearded face, saw us close to him, and pulled up, springing from his machine.
That coal-black beard was in singular contrast to the pallor of his face, and his eyes were as bright as if he had a fever.
"Halloa! Stop there!" he shouted, holding his bicycle to block our road. "Where did you get that dog-cart?
Pull up, man!" he yelled, drawing a pistol from his side pocket. "Pull up, I say, or, by George, I'll put a bullet into your horse."
"Good Lord! Good Lord! What shall I do?" cried the stranger, in an ecstasy of despair. "They've got her, that hell-hound Woodley and the blackguard parson.
Come, man, come, if you really are her friend. Stand by me and we'll save her, if I have to leave my carcass in Charlington Wood.
He ran distractedly, his pistol in his hand, towards a gap in the hedge. Holmes followed him, and I, leaving the horse grazing beside the road, followed Holmes.
"This is where they came through," said he, pointing to the marks of several feet upon the muddy path.
It was a young fellow about seventeen, dressed like an ostler, with leather cords and gaiters. He lay upon his back, his knees drawn up, a terrible cut upon his head.
"That's Peter, the groom," cried the stranger. "He drove her. The beasts have pulled him off and clubbed him.
Let him lie; we can't do him any good, but we may save her from the worst fate that can befall a woman.
We ran frantically down the path, which wound among the trees. We had reached the shrubbery which surrounded the house when Holmes pulled up.
They didn't go to the house. Here are their marks on the left-here, beside the laurel bushes. Ah! I said so.
As he spoke, a woman's shrill scream-a scream which vibrated with a frenzy of horror-burst from the thick, green clump of bushes in front of us.
"This way! This way! They are in the bowling-alley," cried the stranger, darting through the bushes. "Ah, the cowardly dogs!
We had broken suddenly into a lovely glade of greensward surrounded by ancient trees. On the farther side of it, under the shadow of a mighty oak, there stood a singular group of three people.
Between them an elderly, grey-bearded man, wearing a short surplice over a light tweed suit, had evidently just completed the wedding service, for he pocketed his prayer-book as we appeared, and slapped the sinister bridegroom upon the back in jovial congratulation.
"Come on!" cried our guide, "come on!" He rushed across the glade, Holmes and I at his heels. As we approached, the lady staggered against the trunk of the tree for support.
Williamson, the ex-clergyman, bowed to us with mock politeness, and the bully, Woodley, advanced with a shout of brutal and exultant laughter.
"You can take your beard off, Bob," said he. "I know you, right enough. Well, you and your pals have just come in time for me to be able to introduce you to Mrs.
Our guide's answer was a singular one. He snatched off the dark beard which had disguised him and threw it on the ground, disclosing a long, sallow, clean-shaven face below it.
Then he raised his revolver and covered the young ruffian, who was advancing upon him with his dangerous riding-crop swinging in his hand.
"Yes," said our ally, "I am Bob Carruthers, and I'll see this woman righted, if I have to swing for it.
The old man, still clad in his surplice, burst into such a string of foul oaths as I have never heard, and pulled out a revolver of his own, but, before he could raise it, he was looking down the barrel of Holmes's weapon.
"Enough of this," said my friend, coldly. "Drop that pistol! Watson, pick it up! Hold it to his head.
"You have heard of me, I see. I will represent the official police until their arrival. Here, you!" he shouted to a frightened groom, who had appeared at the edge of the glade.
"Come here. Take this note as hard as you can ride to Farnham." He scribbled a few words upon a leaf from his notebook.
Give it to the superintendent at the police-station. Until he comes, I must detain you all under my personal custody.
The strong, masterful personality of Holmes dominated the tragic scene, and all were equally puppets in his hands.
Williamson and Carruthers found themselves carrying the wounded Woodley into the house, and I gave my arm to the frightened girl.
The injured man was laid on his bed, and at Holmes's request I examined him. I carried my report to where he sat in the old tapestry-hung dining-room with his two prisoners before him.
"What!" cried Carruthers, springing out of his chair. "I'll go upstairs and finish him first. Do you tell me that that angel, is to be tied to Roaring Jack Woodley for life?"
"You need not concern yourself about that," said Holmes. "There are two very good reasons why she should, under no circumstances, be his wife.
Then you got it by trick. But, in any case a forced marriage is no marriage, but it is a very serious felony, as you will discover before you have finished.
You'll have time to think the point out during the next ten years or so, unless I am mistaken. As to you, Carruthers, you would have done better to keep your pistol in your pocket.
I kept my distance from her, and I wore a beard, so that she should not recognize me, for she is a good and high-spirited girl, and she wouldn't have stayed in my employment long if she had thought that I was following her about the country roads.
Because then, again, she would have left me, and I couldn't bear to face that. Even if she couldn't love me, it was a great deal to me just to see her dainty form about the house, and to hear the sound of her voice.
Maybe the two things go together. Anyhow, I couldn't let her go. Besides, with this crowd about, it was well that she should have someone near to look after her.
"Hum!" said Holmes. "I think I see how things worked, and I can understand how this message would, as you say, bring them to a head.
"By heaven!" said he, "if you squeal on us, Bob Carruthers, I'll serve you as you served Jack Woodley.
You can bleat about the girl to your heart's content, for that's your own affair, but if you round on your pals to this plain-clothes copper, it will be the worst day's work that ever you did.
"Your reverence need not be excited," said Holmes, lighting a cigarette. "The case is clear enough against you, and all I ask is a few details for my private curiosity.
However, if there's any difficulty in your telling me, I'll do the talking, and then you will see how far you have a chance of holding back your secrets.
In the first place, three of you came from South Africa on this game-you Williamson, you Carruthers, and Woodley.
"Lie number one," said the old man; "I never saw either of them until two months ago, and I have never been in Africa in my life, so you can put that in your pipe and smoke it, Mr. Busybody Holmes!"
Well, well, two of you came over. His reverence is our own homemade article. You had known Ralph Smith in South Africa.
You had reason to believe he would not live long. You found out that his niece would inherit his fortune.
So you came over, the two of you, and hunted up the girl. The idea was that one of you was to marry her, and the other have a share of the plunder.
I see. You got the young lady into your service, and there Woodley was to do the courting. She recognized the drunken brute that he was, and would have nothing to do with him.
Meanwhile, your arrangement was rather upset by the fact that you had yourself fallen in love with the lady.
There was a quarrel between you. He left you in a rage, and began to make his own plans independently of you.
"It strikes me, Williamson, there isn't very much that we can tell this gentleman," cried Carruthers, with a bitter laugh.
Yes, we quarreled, and he knocked me down. I am level with him on that, anyhow. Then I lost sight of him.
That was when he picked up with this outcast padre here. I found that they had set up housekeeping together at this place on the line that she had to pass for the station.
I kept my eye on her after that, for I knew there was some devilry in the wind. I saw them from time to time, for I was anxious to know what they were after.
Two days ago Woodley came up to my house with this cable, which showed that Ralph Smith was dead. He asked me if I would stand by the bargain.
I said I would not. He asked me if I would marry the girl myself and give him a share. I said I would willingly do so, but that she would not have me.
He said, 'Let us get her married first and after a week or two she may see things a bit different.' I said I would have nothing to do with violence.
So he went off cursing, like the foul-mouthed blackguard that he was, and swearing that he would have her yet.
She was leaving me this week-end, and I had got a trap to take her to the station, but I was so uneasy in my mind that I followed her on my bicycle.
She had got a start, however, and before I could catch her, the mischief was done. The first thing I knew about it was when I saw you two gentlemen driving back in her dog-cart.
Holmes rose and tossed the end of his cigarette into the grate. "I have been very obtuse, Watson," said he.
When in your report you said that you had seen the cyclist as you thought arrange his necktie in the shrubbery, that alone should have told me all.
I think, Watson, that in your medical capacity, you might wait upon Miss Smith and tell her that if she is sufficiently recovered, we shall be happy to escort her to her mother's home.
If she is not quite convalescent you will find that a hint that we were about to telegraph to a young electrician in the Midlands would probably complete the cure.
As to you, Mr. Carruthers, I think that you have done what you could to make amends for your share in an evil plot.
There is my card, sir, and if my evidence can be of help in your trial, it shall be at your disposal.
Each case has been the prelude to another, and the crisis once over, the actors have passed for ever out of our busy lives.
Williamson and Woodley were both tried for abduction and assault, the former getting seven years the latter ten.
Of the fate of Carruthers, I have no record, but I am sure that his assault was not viewed very gravely by the court, since Woodley had the reputation of being a most dangerous ruffian, and I think that a few months were sufficient to satisfy the demands of justice.
And yet his first action, when the door had closed behind him, was to stagger against the table, whence he slipped down upon the floor, and there was that majestic figure prostrate and insensible upon our bearskin hearth-rug.
We had sprung to our feet, and for a few moments we stared in silent amazement at this ponderous piece of wreckage, which told of some sudden and fatal storm far out on the ocean of life.
Collar and shirt bore the grime of a long journey, and the hair bristled unkempt from the well-shaped head.
"Absolute exhaustion-possibly mere hunger and fatigue," said I, with my finger on the thready pulse, where the stream of life trickled thin and small.
"Return ticket from Mackleton, in the north of England," said Holmes, drawing it from the watch-pocket.
The puckered eyelids had begun to quiver, and now a pair of vacant grey eyes looked up at us. An instant later the man had scrambled on to his feet, his face crimson with shame.
Forgive this weakness, Mr. Holmes, I have been a little overwrought. Thank you, if I might have a glass of milk and a biscuit, I have no doubt that I should be better.
I came personally, Mr. Holmes, in order to insure that you would return with me. I feared that no telegram would convince you of the absolute urgency of the case.
I am quite well again. I cannot imagine how I came to be so weak. I wish you, Mr. Holmes, to come to Mackleton with me by the next train.
My colleague, Dr. Watson, could tell you that we are very busy at present. I am retained in this case of the Ferrers Documents, and the Abergavenny murder is coming up for trial.
"Important!" Our visitor threw up his hands. "Have you heard nothing of the abduction of the only son of the Duke of Holdernesse?"
Exactly. We had tried to keep it out of the papers, but there was some rumour in the Globe last night.
'Holdernesse, 6th Duke, K.G., P.C. '-half the alphabet! 'Baron Beverley, Earl of Carston'-dear me, what a list!
'Lord Lieutenant of Hallamshire since 1900. Married Edith, daughter of Sir Charles Appledore, 1888. Heir and only child, Lord Saltire.
Owns about two hundred and fifty thousand acres. Minerals in Lancashire and Wales. Address: Carlton House Terrace; Holdernesse Hall, Hallamshire; Carston Castle, Bangor, Wales.
Lord of the Admiralty, 1872; Chief Secretary of State for--' Well, well, this man is certainly one of the greatest subjects of the Crown!
The greatest and perhaps the wealthiest. I am aware, Mr. Holmes, that you take a very high line in professional matters, and that you are prepared to work for the work's sake.
I may tell you, however, that his Grace has already intimated that a check for five thousand pounds will be handed over to the person who can tell him where his son is, and another thousand to him who can name the man or men who have taken him.
"It is a princely offer," said Holmes. "Watson, I think that we shall accompany Dr. Huxtable back to the north of England.
And now, Dr. Huxtable, when you have consumed that milk, you will kindly tell me what has happened, when it happened, how it happened, and, finally, what Dr. Thorneycroft Huxtable, of the Priory School, near Mackleton, has to do with the matter, and why he comes three days after an event-the state of your chin gives the date-to ask for my humble services.
Our visitor had consumed his milk and biscuits. The light had come back to his eyes and the colour to his cheeks, as he set himself with great vigour and lucidity to explain the situation.
He had been with me for two years, and came with the best references, but he was a silent, morose man, not very popular either with masters or boys.
No trace could be found of the fugitives, and now, on Thursday morning, we are as ignorant as we were on Tuesday.
The Duke is greatly agitated, and, as to me, you have seen yourselves the state of nervous prostration to which the suspense and the responsibility have reduced me.
Mr. Holmes, if ever you put forward your full powers, I implore you to do so now, for never in your life could you have a case which is more worthy of them.
Sherlock Holmes had listened with the utmost intentness to the statement of the unhappy schoolmaster.
"You have been very remiss in not coming to me sooner," said he, severely. "You start me on my investigation with a very serious handicap.
It is inconceivable, for example, that this ivy and this lawn would have yielded nothing to an expert observer.
I am not to blame, Mr. Holmes. His Grace was extremely desirous to avoid all public scandal. He was afraid of his family unhappiness being dragged before the world.
Yes, sir, and it has proved most disappointing. An apparent clue was at once obtained, since a boy and a young man were reported to have been seen leaving a neighbouring station by an early train.
Only last night we had news that the couple had been hunted down in Liverpool, and they prove to have no connection whatever with the matter in hand.
Then it was that in my despair and disappointment, after a sleepless night, I came straight to you by the early train.
And yet the problem should be capable of ultimate solution. I shall be very happy to look into it. Have you been able to trace any connection between the missing boy and this German master?
Well, now, you do not mean to seriously suggest that this German rode off upon a bicycle in the dead of the night, bearing the boy in his arms?
Would he not have hidden _a couple_, had he desired to give the idea that they had gone off upon them?
Of course he would. The blind theory won't do. But the incident is an admirable starting-point for an investigation.
After all, a bicycle is not an easy thing to conceal or to destroy. One other question. Did anyone call to see the boy on the day before he disappeared?
The coat of arms was on the envelope, and it was addressed in the Duke's peculiar stiff hand. Besides, the Duke remembers having written.
You see the point of my questions, of course. Either the boy was carried off by force or he went of his own free will.
In the latter case, you would expect that some prompting from outside would be needed to make so young a lad do such a thing.
If he has had no visitors, that prompting must have come in letters; hence I try to find out who were his correspondents.
Who wrote to him on the very day of his disappearance. Were the relations between father and son very friendly?
His Grace is never very friendly with anyone. He is completely immersed in large public questions, and is rather inaccessible to all ordinary emotions.
I have had some confidential talks with Mr. James Wilder, his Grace's secretary. It was he who gave me the information about Lord Saltire's feelings.
In the meantime I will do a little quiet work at your own doors, and perhaps the scent is not so cold but that two old hounds like Watson and myself may get a sniff of it.
That evening found us in the cold, bracing atmosphere of the Peak country, in which Dr. Huxtable's famous school is situated.
It was already dark when we reached it. A card was lying on the hall table, and the butler whispered something to his master, who turned to us with agitation in every heavy feature.
"The Duke is here," said he. "The Duke and Mr. Wilder are in the study. Come, gentlemen, and I will introduce you."
I was, of course, familiar with the pictures of the famous statesman, but the man himself was very different from his representation.
He was a tall and stately person, scrupulously dressed, with a drawn, thin face, and a nose which was grotesquely curved and long.
Such was the stately presence who looked stonily at us from the centre of Dr. Huxtable's hearthrug. Beside him stood a very young man, whom I understood to be Wilder, the private secretary.
He was small, nervous, alert with intelligent light-blue eyes and mobile features. It was he who at once, in an incisive and positive tone, opened the conversation.
I called this morning, Dr. Huxtable, too late to prevent you from starting for London. I learned that your object was to invite Mr. Sherlock Holmes to undertake the conduct of this case.
You are well aware, Dr. Huxtable, that his Grace is particularly anxious to avoid all public scandal.
"The matter can be easily remedied," said the brow-beaten doctor; "Mr. Sherlock Holmes can return to London by the morning train."
I could see that the unfortunate doctor was in the last stage of indecision, from which he was rescued by the deep, sonorous voice of the red-bearded Duke, which boomed out like a dinner-gong.
Far from going to the inn, Mr. Holmes, I should be pleased if you would come and stay with me at Holdernesse Hall.
I thank your Grace. For the purposes of my investigation, I think that it would be wiser for me to remain at the scene of the mystery.
Just as you like, Mr. Holmes. Any information which Mr. Wilder or I can give you is, of course, at your disposal.
"It will probably be necessary for me to see you at the Hall," said Holmes. "I would only ask you now, sir, whether you have formed any explanation in your own mind as to the mysterious disappearance of your son?"
Excuse me if I allude to that which is painful to you, but I have no alternative. Do you think that the Duchess had anything to do with the matter?
The other most obvious explanation is that the child has been kidnapped for the purpose of levying ransom.
One more question, your Grace. I understand that you wrote to your son upon the day when this incident occurred.
Was there anything in your letter which might have unbalanced him or induced him to take such a step?
"His Grace is not in the habit of posting letters himself," said he. "This letter was laid with others upon the study table, and I myself put them in the post-bag."
"For my own part," the Duke continued, "I have advised the police to turn their attention to the south of France.
I could see that there were other questions which Holmes would have wished to put, but the nobleman's abrupt manner showed that the interview was at an end.
It was evident that to his intensely aristocratic nature this discussion of his intimate family affairs with a stranger was most abhorrent, and that he feared lest every fresh question would throw a fiercer light into the discreetly shadowed corners of his ducal history.
When the nobleman and his secretary had left, my friend flung himself at once with characteristic eagerness into the investigation.
The boy's chamber was carefully examined, and yielded nothing save the absolute conviction that it was only through the window that he could have escaped.
That one dint in the short, green grass was the only material witness left of this inexplicable nocturnal flight.
Sherlock Holmes left the house alone, and only returned after eleven. He had obtained a large ordnance map of the neighbourhood, and this he brought into my room, where he laid it out on the bed, and, having balanced the lamp in the middle of it, he began to smoke over it, and occasionally to point out objects of interest with the reeking amber of his pipe.
Look at this map. This dark square is the Priory School. I'll put a pin in it. Now, this line is the main road.
You see that it runs east and west past the school, and you see also that there is no side road for a mile either way.
By a singular and happy chance, we are able to some extent to check what passed along this road during the night in question.
At this point, where my pipe is now resting, a county constable was on duty from twelve to six. It is, as you perceive, the first cross-road on the east side.
This man declares that he was not absent from his post for an instant, and he is positive that neither boy nor man could have gone that way unseen.
I have spoken with this policeman to-night and he appears to me to be a perfectly reliable person. That blocks this end.
The people at the inn were alert all night, awaiting his coming, and one or other of them seems to have continually had an eye upon the road.
They declare that no one passed. If their evidence is good, then we are fortunate enough to be able to block the west, and also to be able to say that the fugitives did not use the road at all.
That is certain. Let us weigh the one against the other. On the south of the house is, as you perceive, a large district of arable land, cut up into small fields, with stone walls between them.
There, I admit that a bicycle is impossible. We can dismiss the idea. We turn to the country on the north.
Here there lies a grove of trees, marked as the 'Ragged Shaw,' and on the farther side stretches a great rolling moor, Lower Gill Moor, extending for ten miles and sloping gradually upward.
Here, at one side of this wilderness, is Holdernesse Hall, ten miles by road, but only six across the moor.
It is a peculiarly desolate plain. A few moor farmers have small holdings, where they rear sheep and cattle.
Except these, the plover and the curlew are the only inhabitants until you come to the Chesterfield high road.
There is a church there, you see, a few cottages, and an inn. Beyond that the hills become precipitous.
"Well, well!" said Holmes, impatiently. "A good cyclist does not need a high road. The moor is intersected with paths, and the moon was at the full.
There was an agitated knock at the door, and an instant afterwards Dr. Huxtable was in the room. In his hand he held a blue cricket-cap with a white chevron on the peak.
"At last we have a clue!" he cried. "Thank heaven! at last we are on the dear boy's track! It is his cap."
In the van of the gipsies who camped on the moor. They left on Tuesday. To-day the police traced them down and examined their caravan.
They shuffled and lied-said that they found it on the moor on Tuesday morning. They know where he is, the rascals!
Thank goodness, they are all safe under lock and key. Either the fear of the law or the Duke's purse will certainly get out of them all that they know.
"So far, so good," said Holmes, when the doctor had at last left the room. "It at least bears out the theory that it is on the side of the Lower Gill Moor that we must hope for results.
The police have really done nothing locally, save the arrest of these gipsies. Look here, Watson! There is a watercourse across the moor.
You see it marked here in the map. In some parts it widens into a morass. This is particularly so in the region between Holdernesse Hall and the school.
It is vain to look elsewhere for tracks in this dry weather, but at that point there is certainly a chance of some record being left.
I will call you early to-morrow morning, and you and I will try if we can throw some little light upon the mystery.
The day was just breaking when I woke to find the long, thin form of Holmes by my bedside. He was fully dressed, and had apparently already been out.
"I have done the lawn and the bicycle shed," said he. "I have also had a rumble through the Ragged Shaw.
Now, Watson, there is cocoa ready in the next room. I must beg you to hurry, for we have a great day before us.
His eyes shone, and his cheek was flushed with the exhilaration of the master workman who sees his work lie ready before him.
A very different Holmes, this active, alert man, from the introspective and pallid dreamer of Baker Street.
I felt, as I looked upon that supple figure, alive with nervous energy, that it was indeed a strenuous day that awaited us.
Certainly, if the lad had gone homeward, he must have passed this, and he could not pass it without leaving his traces.
But no sign of him or the German could be seen. With a darkening face my friend strode along the margin, eagerly observant of every muddy stain upon the mossy surface.
Sheep-marks there were in profusion, and at one place, some miles down, cows had left their tracks. Nothing more.
"Check number one," said Holmes, looking gloomily over the rolling expanse of the moor. "There is another morass down yonder, and a narrow neck between.
We had come on a small black ribbon of pathway. In the middle of it, clearly marked on the sodden soil, was the track of a bicycle.
"A bicycle, certainly, but not the bicycle," said he. "I am familiar with forty-two different impressions left by tires.
This, as you perceive, is a Dunlop, with a patch upon the outer cover. Heidegger's tires were Palmer's, leaving longitudinal stripes.
Possibly, if we could prove a bicycle to have been in his possession. But this we have utterly failed to do.
No, no, my dear Watson. The more deeply sunk impression is, of course, the hind wheel, upon which the weight rests.
You perceive several places where it has passed across and obliterated the more shallow mark of the front one.
It was undoubtedly heading away from the school. It may or may not be connected with our inquiry, but we will follow it backwards before we go any farther.
We did so, and at the end of a few hundred yards lost the tracks as we emerged from the boggy portion of the moor.
Following the path backwards, we picked out another spot, where a spring trickled across it. Here, once again, was the mark of the bicycle, though nearly obliterated by the hoofs of cows.
After that there was no sign, but the path ran right on into Ragged Shaw, the wood which backed on to the school.
From this wood the cycle must have emerged. Holmes sat down on a boulder and rested his chin in his hands.
"Well, well," said he, at last. "It is, of course, possible that a cunning man might change the tires of his bicycle in order to leave unfamiliar tracks.
A criminal who was capable of such a thought is a man whom I should be proud to do business with. We will leave this question undecided and hark back to our morass again, for we have left a good deal unexplored.
We continued our systematic survey of the edge of the sodden portion of the moor, and soon our perseverance was gloriously rewarded.
Right across the lower part of the bog lay a miry path. Holmes gave a cry of delight as he approached it.
An impression like a fine bundle of telegraph wires ran down the centre of it. It was the Palmer tires.
"Here is Herr Heidegger, sure enough!" cried Holmes, exultantly. "My reasoning seems to have been pretty sound, Watson."
But we have a long way still to go. Kindly walk clear of the path. Now let us follow the trail. I fear that it will not lead very far.
We found, however, as we advanced that this portion of the moor is intersected with soft patches, and, though we frequently lost sight of the track, we always succeeded in picking it up once more.
"Do you observe," said Holmes, "that the rider is now undoubtedly forcing the pace? There can be no doubt of it.
There was a broad, irregular smudge covering some yards of the track. Then there were a few footmarks, and the tire reappeared once more.
Holmes held up a crumpled branch of flowering gorse. To my horror I perceived that the yellow blossoms were all dabbled with crimson.
"Bad!" said Holmes. "Bad! Stand clear, Watson! Not an unnecessary footstep! What do I read here? He fell wounded-he stood up-he remounted-he proceeded.
But there is no other track. Cattle on this side path. He was surely not gored by a bull? Impossible!
But I see no traces of anyone else. We must push on, Watson. Surely, with stains as well as the track to guide us, he cannot escape us now.
Our search was not a very long one. The tracks of the tire began to curve fantastically upon the wet and shining path.
On the other side of the bushes a shoe was projecting. We ran round, and there lay the unfortunate rider.
He was a tall man, full-bearded, with spectacles, one glass of which had been knocked out. The cause of his death was a frightful blow upon the head, which had crushed in part of his skull.
That he could have gone on after receiving such an injury said much for the vitality and courage of the man.
He wore shoes, but no socks, and his open coat disclosed a nightshirt beneath it. It was undoubtedly the German master.
Holmes turned the body over reverently, and examined it with great attention. He then sat in deep thought for a time, and I could see by his ruffled brow that this grim discovery had not, in his opinion, advanced us much in our inquiry.
On the other hand, we are bound to inform the police of the discovery, and to see that this poor fellow's body is looked after.
But I need your company and assistance. Wait a bit! There is a fellow cutting peat up yonder. Bring him over here, and he will guide the police.
"Now, Watson," said he, "we have picked up two clues this morning. One is the bicycle with the Palmer tire, and we see what that has led to.
The other is the bicycle with the patched Dunlop. Before we start to investigate that, let us try to realize what we do know, so as to make the most of it, and to separate the essential from the accidental.
First of all, I wish to impress upon you that the boy certainly left of his own free-will. He got down from his window and he went off, either alone or with someone.
Well, now, let us turn to this unfortunate German master. The boy was fully dressed when he fled. Therefore, he foresaw what he would do.
Why did he go? Because, from his bedroom window, he saw the flight of the boy, because he wished to overtake him and bring him back.
Now I come to the critical part of my argument. The natural action of a man in pursuing a little boy would be to run after him.
He would know that he could overtake him. But the German does not do so. He turns to his bicycle. I am told that he was an excellent cyclist.
The lad, then, had a companion in his flight. And the flight was a swift one, since it took five miles before an expert cyclist could overtake them.
Yet we survey the ground round the scene of the tragedy. What do we find? A few cattle-tracks, nothing more.
I took a wide sweep round, and there is no path within fifty yards. Another cyclist could have had nothing to do with the actual murder, nor were there any human foot-marks.
"Admirable!" he said. "A most illuminating remark. It is impossible as I state it, and therefore I must in some respect have stated it wrong.
Tut, tut, we have solved some worse problems. At least we have plenty of material, if we can only use it.
Come, then, and, having exhausted the Palmer, let us see what the Dunlop with the patched cover has to offer us.
We picked up the track and followed it onward for some distance, but soon the moor rose into a long, heather-tufted curve, and we left the watercourse behind us.
No further help from tracks could be hoped for. At the spot where we saw the last of the Dunlop tire it might equally have led to Holdernesse Hall, the stately towers of which rose some miles to our left, or to a low, grey village which lay in front of us and marked the position of the Chesterfield high road.
As we approached the forbidding and squalid inn, with the sign of a game-cock above the door, Holmes gave a sudden groan, and clutched me by the shoulder to save himself from falling.
He had had one of those violent strains of the ankle which leave a man helpless. With difficulty he limped up to the door, where a squat, dark, elderly man was smoking a black clay pipe.
"Who are you, and how do you get my name so pat?" the countryman answered, with a suspicious flash of a pair of cunning eyes.
Well, it's printed on the board above your head. It's easy to see a man who is master of his own house.
"Look here, my man," said he. "This is really rather an awkward fix for me. I don't mind how I get on."
"Pals of the Dook, I suppose?" said the landlord, surveying our mud-stained garments with ironical eyes.
"I've less reason to wish the Dook well than most men," said he, "for I was head coachman once, and cruel bad he treated me.
It was him that sacked me without a character on the word of a lying corn-chandler. But I'm glad to hear that the young lord was heard of in Liverpool, and I'll help you to take the news to the Hall.
When we were left alone in the stone-flagged kitchen, it was astonishing how rapidly that sprained ankle recovered.
It was nearly nightfall, and we had eaten nothing since early morning, so that we spent some time over our meal.
Holmes was lost in thought, and once or twice he walked over to the window and stared earnestly out. It opened on to a squalid courtyard.
In the far corner was a smithy, where a grimy lad was at work. On the other side were the stables. Holmes had sat down again after one of these excursions, when he suddenly sprang out of his chair with a loud exclamation.
"By heaven, Watson, I believe that I've got it!" he cried. "Yes, yes, it must be so. Watson, do you remember seeing any cow-tracks to-day?"
Well, everywhere. They were at the morass, and again on the path, and again near where poor Heidegger met his death.
Strange, Watson, that we should see tracks all along our line, but never a cow on the whole moor. Very strange, Watson, eh?
But I can. I could swear to it. However, we will go back at our leisure and verify it. What a blind beetle I have been, not to draw my conclusion.
Only that it is a remarkable cow which walks, canters, and gallops. By George! Watson, it was no brain of a country publican that thought out such a blind as that.
The coast seems to be clear, save for that lad in the smithy. Let us slip out and see what we can see.
There were two rough-haired, unkempt horses in the tumble-down stable. Holmes raised the hind leg of one of them and laughed aloud.
Old shoes, but newly shod-old shoes, but new nails. This case deserves to be a classic. Let us go across to the smithy.
The lad continued his work without regarding us. I saw Holmes's eye darting to right and left among the litter of iron and wood which was scattered about the floor.
Suddenly, however, we heard a step behind us, and there was the landlord, his heavy eyebrows drawn over his savage eyes, his swarthy features convulsed with passion.
He held a short, metal-headed stick in his hand, and he advanced in so menacing a fashion that I was right glad to feel the revolver in my pocket.
"Why, Mr. Reuben Hayes," said Holmes, coolly, "one might think that you were afraid of our finding something out."
The man mastered himself with a violent effort, and his grim mouth loosened into a false laugh, which was more menacing than his frown.
"You're welcome to all you can find out in my smithy," said he. "But look here, mister, I don't care for folk poking about my place without my leave, so the sooner you pay your score and get out of this the better I shall be pleased."
"All right, Mr. Hayes, no harm meant," said Holmes. "We have been having a look at your horses, but I think I'll walk, after all.
"Not more than two miles to the Hall gates. That's the road to the left." He watched us with sullen eyes until we had left his premises.
We did not go very far along the road, for Holmes stopped the instant that the curve hid us from the landlord's view.
"We were warm, as the children say, at that inn," said he. "I seem to grow colder every step that I take away from it.
"I am convinced," said I, "that this Reuben Hayes knows all about it. A more self-evident villain I never saw."
Oh! he impressed you in that way, did he? There are the horses, there is the smithy. Yes, it is an interesting place, this Fighting Cock.
A long, sloping hillside, dotted with grey limestone boulders, stretched behind us. We had turned off the road, and were making our way up the hill, when, looking in the direction of Holdernesse Hall, I saw a cyclist coming swiftly along.
"Get down, Watson!" cried Holmes, with a heavy hand upon my shoulder. We had hardly sunk from view when the man flew past us on the road.
Amid a rolling cloud of dust, I caught a glimpse of a pale, agitated face-a face with horror in every lineament, the mouth open, the eyes staring wildly in front.
We scrambled from rock to rock, until in a few moments we had made our way to a point from which we could see the front door of the inn.
Wilder's bicycle was leaning against the wall beside it. No one was moving about the house, nor could we catch a glimpse of any faces at the windows.
Slowly the twilight crept down as the sun sank behind the high towers of Holdernesse Hall. Then, in the gloom, we saw the two side-lamps of a trap light up in the stable-yard of the inn, and shortly afterwards heard the rattle of hoofs, as it wheeled out into the road and tore off at a furious pace in the direction of Chesterfield.
A single man in a dog-cart, so far as I could see. Well, it certainly was not Mr. James Wilder, for there he is at the door.
A red square of light had sprung out of the darkness. In the middle of it was the black figure of the secretary, his head advanced, peering out into the night.
It was evident that he was expecting someone. Then at last there were steps in the road, a second figure was visible for an instant against the light, the door shut, and all was black once more.
Quite so. These are what one may call the private guests. Now, what in the world is Mr. James Wilder doing in that den at this hour of night, and who is the companion who comes to meet him there?
Together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door of the inn. The bicycle still leaned against the wall.
Holmes struck a match and held it to the back wheel, and I heard him chuckle as the light fell upon a patched Dunlop tire.
I must have a peep through that, Watson. If you bend your back and support yourself upon the wall, I think that I can manage.
"Come, my friend," said he, "our day's work has been quite long enough. I think that we have gathered all that we can.
He hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the moor, nor would he enter the school when he reached it, but went on to Mackleton Station, whence he could send some telegrams.
"All goes well, my friend," said he. "I promise that before to-morrow evening we shall have reached the solution of the mystery."
At eleven o'clock next morning my friend and I were walking up the famous yew avenue of Holdernesse Hall.
We were ushered through the magnificent Elizabethan doorway and into his Grace's study. There we found Mr. James Wilder, demure and courtly, but with some trace of that wild terror of the night before still lurking in his furtive eyes and in his twitching features.
You have come to see his Grace? I am sorry, but the fact is that the Duke is far from well. He has been very much upset by the tragic news.
He greeted us with a stately courtesy and seated himself at his desk, his red beard streaming down on the table.
"The fact is, your Grace," said he, "that my colleague, Dr. Watson, and myself had an assurance from Dr. Huxtable that a reward had been offered in this case.
It amounted, if I am correctly informed, to five thousand pounds to anyone who will tell you where your son is?
Under the latter heading is included, no doubt, not only those who may have taken him away, but also those who conspire to keep him in his present position?
"Yes, yes," cried the Duke, impatiently. "If you do your work well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you will have no reason to complain of niggardly treatment."
My friend rubbed his thin hands together with an appearance of avidity which was a surprise to me, who knew his frugal tastes.
"I fancy that I see your Grace's check-book upon the table," said he. "I should be glad if you would make me out a check for six thousand pounds.
It would be as well, perhaps, for you to cross it. The Capital and Counties Bank, Oxford Street branch are my agents.
I mean that I have earned the reward. I know where your son is, and I know some, at least, of those who are holding him.
Sherlock Holmes's answer was an astounding one. He stepped swiftly forward and touched the Duke upon the shoulder.
Never shall I forget the Duke's appearance as he sprang up and clawed with his hands, like one who is sinking into an abyss.
Then, with an extraordinary effort of aristocratic self-command, he sat down and sank his face in his hands.
I shall be as good as my word, Mr. Holmes. I am about to write your check, however unwelcome the information which you have gained may be to me.
When the offer was first made, I little thought the turn which events might take. But you and your friend are men of discretion, Mr. Holmes?
I must put it plainly, Mr. Holmes. If only you two know of this incident, there is no reason why it should go any farther.
I fear, your Grace, that matters can hardly be arranged so easily. There is the death of this schoolmaster to be accounted for.
But James knew nothing of that. You cannot hold him responsible for that. It was the work of this brutal ruffian whom he had the misfortune to employ.
I must take the view, your Grace, that when a man embarks upon a crime, he is morally guilty of any other crime which may spring from it.
The instant that he heard of it he made a complete confession to me, so filled was he with horror and remorse.
He lost not an hour in breaking entirely with the murderer. Oh, Mr. Holmes, you must save him-you must save him!
I tell you that you must save him!" The Duke had dropped the last attempt at self-command, and was pacing the room with a convulsed face and with his clenched hands raving in the air.
At last he mastered himself and sat down once more at his desk. "I appreciate your conduct in coming here before you spoke to anyone else," said he.
"Exactly," said Holmes. "I think, your Grace, that this can only be done by absolute frankness between us.
I am disposed to help your Grace to the best of my ability, but, in order to do so, I must understand to the last detail how the matter stands.
Your Grace can hardly have heard of any small reputation which I possess, or you would not imagine that it is so easy to escape me.
Mr. Reuben Hayes was arrested at Chesterfield, on my information, at eleven o'clock last night. I had a telegram from the head of the local police before I left the school this morning.
"You seem to have powers that are hardly human," said he. "So Reuben Hayes is taken? I am right glad to hear it, if it will not react upon the fate of James."
What brought all his wicked scheme to wreck was your discovery of this man Heidegger's dead body. James was seized with horror at the news.
He made a complete voluntary confession. Then he implored me to keep his secret for three days longer, so as to give his wretched accomplice a chance of saving his guilty life.
I yielded-as I have always yielded-to his prayers, and instantly James hurried off to the Fighting Cock to warn Hayes and give him the means of flight.
I could not go there by daylight without provoking comment, but as soon as night fell I hurried off to see my dear Arthur.
You asked for frankness, Mr. Holmes, and I have taken you at your word, for I have now told you everything without an attempt at circumlocution or concealment.
"I will," said Holmes. "In the first place, your Grace, I am bound to tell you that you have placed yourself in a most serious position in the eyes of the law.
You have condoned a felony, and you have aided the escape of a murderer, for I cannot doubt that any money which was taken by James Wilder to aid his accomplice in his flight came from your Grace's purse.
This is, indeed, a most serious matter. Even more culpable in my opinion, your Grace, is your attitude towards your younger son.
What are promises to such people as these? You have no guarantee that he will not be spirited away again.
To humour your guilty elder son, you have exposed your innocent younger son to imminent and unnecessary danger.
The proud lord of Holdernesse was not accustomed to be so rated in his own ducal hall. The blood flushed into his high forehead, but his conscience held him dumb.
I will help you, but on one condition only. It is that you ring for the footman and let me give such orders as I like.
"Now," said Holmes, when the rejoicing lackey had disappeared, "having secured the future, we can afford to be more lenient with the past.
I am not in an official position, and there is no reason, so long as the ends of justice are served, why I should disclose all that I know.
I would warn your Grace, however, that the continued presence of Mr. James Wilder in your household can only lead to misfortune.
I understand that, Mr. Holmes, and it is already settled that he shall leave me forever, and go to seek his fortune in Australia.
In that case, your Grace, since you have yourself stated that any unhappiness in your married life was caused by his presence, I would suggest that you make such amends as you can to the Duchess, and that you try to resume those relations which have been so unhappily interrupted.
"In that case," said Holmes, rising, "I think that my friend and I can congratulate ourselves upon several most happy results from our little visit to the North.
There is one other small point upon which I desire some light. This fellow Hayes had shod his horses with shoes which counterfeited the tracks of cows.
The Duke stood in thought for a moment, with a look of intense surprise on his face. Then he opened a door and showed us into a large room furnished as a museum.
"These shoes," it ran, "were dug up in the moat of Holdernesse Hall. They are for the use of horses, but they are shaped below with a cloven foot of iron, so as to throw pursuers off the track.
They are supposed to have belonged to some of the marauding Barons of Holdernesse in the Middle Ages.
Holmes opened the case, and moistening his finger he passed it along the shoe. A thin film of recent mud was left upon his skin.
"Thank you," said he, as he replaced the glass. "It is the second most interesting object that I have seen in the North."
Holmes folded up his check and placed it carefully in his notebook. "I am a poor man," said he, as he patted it affectionately, and thrust it into the depths of his inner pocket.
Holmes, however, like all great artists, lived for his art's sake, and, save in the case of the Duke of Holdernesse, I have seldom known him claim any large reward for his inestimable services.
So unworldly was he-or so capricious-that he frequently refused his help to the powerful and wealthy where the problem made no appeal to his sympathies, while he would devote weeks of most intense application to the affairs of some humble client whose case presented those strange and dramatic qualities which appealed to his imagination and challenged his ingenuity.
Close on the heels of these two famous cases came the tragedy of Woodman's Lee, and the very obscure circumstances which surrounded the death of Captain Peter Carey.
No record of the doings of Mr. Sherlock Holmes would be complete which did not include some account of this very unusual affair.
During the first week of July, my friend had been absent so often and so long from our lodgings that I knew he had something on hand.
He had at least five small refuges in different parts of London, in which he was able to change his personality.
He had gone out before breakfast, and I had sat down to mine when he strode into the room, his hat upon his head and a huge barbed-headed spear tucked like an umbrella under his arm.
"Good gracious, Holmes!" I cried. "You don't mean to say that you have been walking about London with that thing?"
And I return with an excellent appetite. There can be no question, my dear Watson, of the value of exercise before breakfast.
If you could have looked into Allardyce's back shop, you would have seen a dead pig swung from a hook in the ceiling, and a gentleman in his shirt sleeves furiously stabbing at it with this weapon.
I was that energetic person, and I have satisfied myself that by no exertion of my strength can I transfix the pig with a single blow.
Because it seemed to me to have an indirect bearing upon the mystery of Woodman's Lee. Ah, Hopkins, I got your wire last night, and I have been expecting you.
Our visitor was an exceedingly alert man, thirty years of age, dressed in a quiet tweed suit, but retaining the erect bearing of one who was accustomed to official uniform.
No, thank you, sir. I breakfasted before I came round. I spent the night in town, for I came up yesterday to report.
I wish to heavens that you would, Mr. Holmes. It's my first big chance, and I am at my wits' end. For goodness' sake, come down and lend me a hand.
Well, well, it just happens that I have already read all the available evidence, including the report of the inquest, with some care.
By the way, what do you make of that tobacco pouch, found on the scene of the crime? Is there no clue there?
It was the man's own pouch, sir. His initials were inside it. And it was of sealskin,-and he was an old sealer.
No, sir, we could find no pipe. Indeed, he smoked very little, and yet he might have kept some tobacco for his friends.
No doubt. I only mention it because, if I had been handling the case, I should have been inclined to make that the starting-point of my investigation.
However, my friend, Dr. Watson, knows nothing of this matter, and I should be none the worse for hearing the sequence of events once more.
I know your methods, sir, and I applied them. Before I permitted anything to be moved, I examined most carefully the ground outside, and also the floor of the room.
My good Hopkins, I have investigated many crimes, but I have never yet seen one which was committed by a flying creature.
As long as the criminal remains upon two legs so long must there be some indentation, some abrasion, some trifling displacement which can be detected by the scientific searcher.
It is incredible that this blood-bespattered room contained no trace which could have aided us. I understand, however, from the inquest that there were some objects which you failed to overlook?
I was a fool not to call you in at the time Mr. Holmes. However, that's past praying for now. Yes, there were several objects in the room which called for special attention.
One was the harpoon with which the deed was committed. It had been snatched down from a rack on the wall.
Two others remained there, and there was a vacant place for the third. On the stock was engraved 'SS.
The fact that the crime was committed at two in the morning, and yet Peter Carey was fully dressed, suggested that he had an appointment with the murderer, which is borne out by the fact that a bottle of rum and two dirty glasses stood upon the table.
"Yes," said Holmes; "I think that both inferences are permissible. Was there any other spirit but rum in the room?"
Yes, there was a tantalus containing brandy and whisky on the sea-chest. It is of no importance to us, however, since the decanters were full, and it had therefore not been used.
"For all that, its presence has some significance," said Holmes. "However, let us hear some more about the objects which do seem to you to bear upon the case."
It lay in the middle. It was of coarse sealskin-the straight-haired skin, with a leather thong to bind it.
Stanley Hopkins drew from his pocket a drab-covered notebook. The outside was rough and worn, the leaves discoloured.
On the first page were written the initials "J.H.N." and the date "1883." Holmes laid it on the table and examined it in his minute way, while Hopkins and I gazed over each shoulder.
On the second page were the printed letters "C.P.R.," and then came several sheets of numbers. Another heading was "Argentine," another "Costa Rica," and another "San Paulo," each with pages of signs and figures after it.
They appear to be lists of Stock Exchange securities. I thought that 'J.H.N.' were the initials of a broker, and that 'C.P.R.'
"What a fool I have been!" he cried. "Of course, it is as you say. Then 'J.H.N.' are the only initials we have to solve.
I have already examined the old Stock Exchange lists, and I can find no one in 1883, either in the house or among the outside brokers, whose initials correspond with these.
I would also urge that the introduction into the case of a document relating to large masses of valuable securities gives us for the first time some indication of a motive for the crime.
"I must admit both your points," said he. "I confess that this notebook, which did not appear at the inquest, modifies any views which I may have formed.
I had come to a theory of the crime in which I can find no place for this. Have you endeavoured to trace any of the securities here mentioned?
Inquiries are now being made at the offices, but I fear that the complete register of the stockholders of these South American concerns is in South America, and that some weeks must elapse before we can trace the shares.
Exactly, Mr. Holmes. I appreciated that point, and I conjectured that it was dropped by the murderer in his hurried flight.
A sheath-knife, still in its sheath. It lay at the feet of the dead man. Mrs. Carey has identified it as being her husband's property.
"It would have been an easier task a week ago," said he. "But even now my visit may not be entirely fruitless.
Watson, if you can spare the time, I should be very glad of your company. If you will call a four-wheeler, Hopkins, we shall be ready to start for Forest Row in a quarter of an hour.
Here, in a clearing upon the green slope of a hill, stood a long, low, stone house, approached by a curving drive running through the fields.
Nearer the road, and surrounded on three sides by bushes, was a small outhouse, one window and the door facing in our direction.
It was a terrible household that Black Peter Carey had made for himself, and it was with a sense of relief that we found ourselves in the sunlight again and making our way along a path which had been worn across the fields by the feet of the dead man.
The outhouse was the simplest of dwellings, wooden-walled, shingle-roofed, one window beside the door and one on the farther side.
Stanley Hopkins drew the key from his pocket and had stooped to the lock, when he paused with a look of attention and surprise upon his face.
There could be no doubt of the fact. The woodwork was cut, and the scratches showed white through the paint, as if they had been that instant done.
Someone has tried to force this also. Whoever it was has failed to make his way in. He must have been a very poor burglar.
"This is a most extraordinary thing," said the inspector, "I could swear that these marks were not here yesterday evening."
Very unlikely. Few of them would dare to set foot in the grounds, far less try to force their way into the cabin.
It is very probable. He came expecting to find the door open. He tried to get in with the blade of a very small penknife.
So I should say. It will be our fault if we are not there to receive him. Meanwhile, let me see the inside of the cabin.
The traces of the tragedy had been removed, but the furniture within the little room still stood as it had been on the night of the crime.
For two hours, with most intense concentration, Holmes examined every object in turn, but his face showed that his quest was not a successful one.
Something has been taken. There is less dust in this corner of the shelf than elsewhere. It may have been a book lying on its side.
It may have been a box. Well, well, I can do nothing more. Let us walk in these beautiful woods, Watson, and give a few hours to the birds and the flowers.
We shall meet you here later, Hopkins, and see if we can come to closer quarters with the gentleman who has paid this visit in the night.
It was past eleven o'clock when we formed our little ambuscade. Hopkins was for leaving the door of the hut open, but Holmes was of the opinion that this would rouse the suspicions of the stranger.
In this way we should be able to watch our man if he struck a light, and see what his object was in this stealthy nocturnal visit.
It was a long and melancholy vigil, and yet brought with it something of the thrill which the hunter feels when he lies beside the water-pool, and waits for the coming of the thirsty beast of prey.
What savage creature was it which might steal upon us out of the darkness? Was it a fierce tiger of crime, which could only be taken fighting hard with flashing fang and claw, or would it prove to be some skulking jackal, dangerous only to the weak and unguarded?
In absolute silence we crouched amongst the bushes, waiting for whatever might come. At first the steps of a few belated villagers, or the sound of voices from the village, lightened our vigil, but one by one these interruptions died away, and an absolute stillness fell upon us, save for the chimes of the distant church, which told us of the progress of the night, and for the rustle and whisper of a fine rain falling amid the foliage which roofed us in.
Half-past two had chimed, and it was the darkest hour which precedes the dawn, when we all started as a low but sharp click came from the direction of the gate.
The man was trying to force the lock. This time his skill was greater or his tool was better, for there was a sudden snap and the creak of the hinges.
Then a match was struck, and next instant the steady light from a candle filled the interior of the hut.
The nocturnal visitor was a young man, frail and thin, with a black moustache, which intensified the deadly pallor of his face.
He was dressed like a gentleman, in Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers, with a cloth cap upon his head.
We watched him staring round with frightened eyes. Then he laid the candle-end upon the table and disappeared from our view into one of the corners.
Then, with an angry gesture of his clenched hand, he closed the book, replaced it in the corner, and put out the light.
He had hardly turned to leave the hut when Hopkin's hand was on the fellow's collar, and I heard his loud gasp of terror as he understood that he was taken.
The candle was relit, and there was our wretched captive, shivering and cowering in the grasp of the detective.
"You are detectives, I suppose?" said he. "You imagine I am connected with the death of Captain Peter Carey.
"Well, I will tell you," he said. "Why should I not? And yet I hate to think of this old scandal gaining a new lease of life.
"You mean the West Country bankers," said he. "They failed for a million, ruined half the county families of Cornwall, and Neligan disappeared."
At last we were getting something positive, and yet it seemed a long gap between an absconding banker and Captain Peter Carey pinned against the wall with one of his own harpoons.
I came down to Sussex with the intention of seeing the captain, but it was at this moment that his terrible death occurred.
I read at the inquest a description of his cabin, in which it stated that the old logbooks of his vessel were preserved in it.
It struck me that if I could see what occurred in the month of August, 1883, on board the _Sea Unicorn_, I might settle the mystery of my father's fate.
I tried last night to get at these logbooks, but was unable to open the door. To-night I tried again and succeeded, but I find that the pages which deal with that month have been torn from the book.
"Then how do you account for _that_?" cried Hopkins, as he held up the damning notebook, with the initials of our prisoner on the first leaf and the blood-stain on the cover.
"That is enough," said Hopkins, sternly. "Whatever else you have to say, you must say in court. You will walk down with me now to the police-station.
Rooms have been reserved for you at the Brambletye Hotel, so we can all walk down to the village together.
Oh, yes, my dear Watson, I am perfectly satisfied. At the same time, Stanley Hopkins's methods do not commend themselves to me.
I am disappointed in Stanley Hopkins. I had hoped for better things from him. One should always look for a possible alternative, and provide against it.
The line of investigation which I have myself been pursuing. It may give us nothing. I cannot tell. But at least I shall follow it to the end.
Several letters were waiting for Holmes at Baker Street. He snatched one of them up, opened it, and burst out into a triumphant chuckle of laughter.
Excellent, Watson! The alternative develops. Have you telegraph forms? Just write a couple of messages for me: 'Sumner, Shipping Agent, Ratcliff Highway.
Send three men on, to arrive ten to-morrow morning.-Basil.' That's my name in those parts. The other is: 'Inspector Stanley Hopkins, 46 Lord Street, Brixton.
Come breakfast to-morrow at nine-thirty. Important. Wire if unable to come.-Sherlock Holmes.' There, Watson, this infernal case has haunted me for ten days.
I hereby banish it completely from my presence. To-morrow, I trust that we shall hear the last of it forever.
Sharp at the hour named Inspector Stanley Hopkins appeared, and we sat down together to the excellent breakfast which Mrs. Hudson had prepared.
Undoubtedly. I find that young Neligan arrived at the Brambletye Hotel on the very day of the crime. He came on the pretence of playing golf.
His room was on the ground-floor, and he could get out when he liked. That very night he went down to Woodman's Lee, saw Peter Carey at the hut, quarrelled with him, and killed him with the harpoon.
Then, horrified by what he had done, he fled out of the hut, dropping the notebook which he had brought with him in order to question Peter Carey about these different securities.
You may have observed that some of them were marked with ticks, and the others-the great majority-were not.
After his flight he did not dare to approach the hut again for some time, but at last he forced himself to do so in order to obtain the information which he needed.
It seems to me to have only one drawback, Hopkins, and that is that it is intrinsically impossible. Have you tried to drive a harpoon through a body?
No? Tut, tut my dear sir, you must really pay attention to these details. My friend Watson could tell you that I spent a whole morning in that exercise.
It is no easy matter, and requires a strong and practised arm. But this blow was delivered with such violence that the head of the weapon sank deep into the wall.
Was it his profile that was seen on the blind two nights before? No, no, Hopkins, it is another and more formidable person for whom we must seek.
The detective's face had grown longer and longer during Holmes's speech. His hopes and his ambitions were all crumbling about him.
You can't deny that Neligan was present that night, Mr. Holmes. The book will prove that. I fancy that I have evidence enough to satisfy a jury, even if you are able to pick a hole in it.
Besides, Mr. Holmes, I have laid my hand upon my man. As to this terrible person of yours, where is he?
"I rather fancy that he is on the stair," said Holmes, serenely. "I think, Watson, that you would do well to put that revolver where you can reach it."
There had been some talking in gruff voices outside, and now Mrs. Hudson opened the door to say that there were three men inquiring for Captain Basil.
I am sorry, Lancaster, but the berth is full. Here is half a sovereign for your trouble. Just step into this room and wait there for a few minutes.
The second man was a long, dried-up creature, with lank hair and sallow cheeks. His name was Hugh Pattins.
"Yes, sir." He took a sheaf of worn and greasy forms from his pocket. Holmes glanced over them and returned them.
"You are just the man I want," said he. "Here's the agreement on the side-table. If you sign it the whole matter will be settled."
I heard a click of steel and a bellow like an enraged bull. The next instant Holmes and the seaman were rolling on the ground together.
Only when I pressed the cold muzzle of the revolver to his temple did he at last understand that resistance was vain.
"I must really apologize, Hopkins," said Sherlock Holmes. "I fear that the scrambled eggs are cold. However, you will enjoy the rest of your breakfast all the better, will you not, for the thought that you have brought your case to a triumphant conclusion."
"I don't know what to say, Mr. Holmes," he blurted out at last, with a very red face. "It seems to me that I have been making a fool of myself from the beginning.
I understand now, what I should never have forgotten, that I am the pupil and you are the master. Even now I see what you have done, but I don't know how you did it or what it signifies.
"Well, well," said Holmes, good-humouredly. "We all learn by experience, and your lesson this time is that you should never lose sight of the alternative.
You were so absorbed in young Neligan that you could not spare a thought to Patrick Cairns, the true murderer of Peter Carey.
"See here, mister," said he, "I make no complaint of being man-handled in this fashion, but I would have you call things by their right names.
You say I murdered Peter Carey, I say I killed Peter Carey, and there's all the difference. Maybe you don't believe what I say.
It's soon told, and, by the Lord, every word of it is truth. I knew Black Peter, and when he pulled out his knife I whipped a harpoon through him sharp, for I knew that it was him or me.
That's how he died. You can call it murder. Anyhow, I'd as soon die with a rope round my neck as with Black Peter's knife in my heart.
Well, when I came to examine the box I found there was no money in it, and nothing but papers that I would not dare to sell.
I had lost my hold on Black Peter and was stranded in London without a shilling. There was only my trade left.
I saw these advertisements about harpooners, and high wages, so I went to the shipping agents, and they sent me here.
That's all I know, and I say again that if I killed Black Peter, the law should give me thanks, for I saved them the price of a hempen rope.
"A very clear statement said Holmes," rising and lighting his pipe. "I think, Hopkins, that you should lose no time in conveying your prisoner to a place of safety.
This room is not well adapted for a cell, and Mr. Patrick Cairns occupies too large a proportion of our carpet.
"Mr. Holmes," said Hopkins, "I do not know how to express my gratitude. Even now I do not understand how you attained this result."
Simply by having the good fortune to get the right clue from the beginning. It is very possible if I had known about this notebook it might have led away my thoughts, as it did yours.
I was convinced that the initials 'P.C.' upon the pouch were a coincidence, and not those of Peter Carey, since he seldom smoked, and no pipe was found in his cabin.
You remember that I asked whether whisky and brandy were in the cabin. You said they were. How many landsmen are there who would drink rum when they could get these other spirits?
My dear sir, the problem had become a very simple one. If it were a seaman, it could only be a seaman who had been with him on the _Sea Unicorn_.
So far as I could learn he had sailed in no other ship. I spent three days in wiring to Dundee, and at the end of that time I had ascertained the names of the crew of the _Sea Unicorn_ in 1883.
When I found Patrick Cairns among the harpooners, my research was nearing its end. I argued that the man was probably in London, and that he would desire to leave the country for a time.
I therefore spent some days in the East End, devised an Arctic expedition, put forth tempting terms for harpooners who would serve under Captain Basil-and behold the result!
"You must obtain the release of young Neligan as soon as possible," said Holmes. "I confess that I think you owe him some apology.
The tin box must be returned to him, but, of course, the securities which Peter Carey has sold are lost forever.
There's the cab, Hopkins, and you can remove your man. If you want me for the trial, my address and that of Watson will be somewhere in Norway-I'll send particulars later.
It is years since the incidents of which I speak took place, and yet it is with diffidence that I allude to them.
It records an absolutely unique experience in the career both of Mr. Sherlock Holmes and of myself. The reader will excuse me if I conceal the date or any other fact by which he might trace the actual occurrence.
We had been out for one of our evening rambles, Holmes and I, and had returned about six o'clock on a cold, frosty winter's evening.
As Holmes turned up the lamp the light fell upon a card on the table. He glanced at it, and then, with an ejaculation of disgust, threw it on the floor.
"The worst man in London," Holmes answered, as he sat down and stretched his legs before the fire. "Is anything on the back of the card?"
Well, that's how Milverton impresses me. I've had to do with fifty murderers in my career, but the worst of them never gave me the repulsion which I have for this fellow.
I'll tell you, Watson. He is the king of all the blackmailers. Heaven help the man, and still more the woman, whose secret and reputation come into the power of Milverton!
With a smiling face and a heart of marble, he will squeeze and squeeze until he has drained them dry.
He receives these wares not only from treacherous valets or maids, but frequently from genteel ruffians, who have gained the confidence and affection of trusting women.
He deals with no niggard hand. I happen to know that he paid seven hundred pounds to a footman for a note two lines in length, and that the ruin of a noble family was the result.
Everything which is in the market goes to Milverton, and there are hundreds in this great city who turn white at his name.
No one knows where his grip may fall, for he is far too rich and far too cunning to work from hand to mouth.
He will hold a card back for years in order to play it at the moment when the stake is best worth winning.
I have said that he is the worst man in London, and I would ask you how could one compare the ruffian, who in hot blood bludgeons his mate, with this man, who methodically and at his leisure tortures the soul and wrings the nerves in order to add to his already swollen money-bags?
Technically, no doubt, but practically not. What would it profit a woman, for example, to get him a few months' imprisonment if her own ruin must immediately follow?
His victims dare not hit back. If ever he blackmailed an innocent person, then indeed we should have him, but he is as cunning as the Evil One.
They would suffice to break off the match. Milverton will send the letters to the Earl unless a large sum of money is paid him.
At that instant there was a clatter and a rattle in the street below. Looking down I saw a stately carriage and pair, the brilliant lamps gleaming on the glossy haunches of the noble chestnuts.
A footman opened the door, and a small, stout man in a shaggy astrakhan overcoat descended. A minute later he was in the room.
There was something of Mr. Pickwick's benevolence in his appearance, marred only by the insincerity of the fixed smile and by the hard glitter of those restless and penetrating eyes.
His voice was as smooth and suave as his countenance, as he advanced with a plump little hand extended, murmuring his regret for having missed us at his first visit.
Holmes disregarded the outstretched hand and looked at him with a face of granite. Milverton's smile broadened, he shrugged his shoulders removed his overcoat, folded it with great deliberation over the back of a chair, and then took a seat.
Very good, Mr. Holmes. It is only in your client's interests that I protested. The matter is so very delicate--
Then we can proceed to business. You say that you are acting for Lady Eva. Has she empowered you to accept my terms?
My dear sir, it is painful for me to discuss it, but if the money is not paid on the 14th, there certainly will be no marriage on the 18th.
"You appear to me," he said, at last, "to be taking matters too much for granted. I am, of course, familiar with the contents of these letters.
My client will certainly do what I may advise. I shall counsel her to tell her future husband the whole story and to trust to his generosity.
"They are sprightly-very sprightly," Milverton answered. "The lady was a charming correspondent. But I can assure you that the Earl of Dovercourt would fail to appreciate them.
"Wait a little," he said. "You go too fast. We should certainly make every effort to avoid scandal in so delicate a matter."
I beg, therefore, that you will moderate your demands, and that you will return the letters at the price I indicate, which is, I assure you, the highest that you can get.
They may hesitate as to an acceptable wedding present. Let me assure them that this little bundle of letters would give more joy than all the candelabra and butter-dishes in London.
"Dear me, dear me, how unfortunate!" cried Milverton, taking out a bulky pocketbook. "I cannot help thinking that ladies are ill-advised in not making an effort.
Look at this!" He held up a little note with a coat-of-arms upon the envelope. "That belongs to-well, perhaps it is hardly fair to tell the name until to-morrow morning.
But at that time it will be in the hands of the lady's husband. And all because she will not find a beggarly sum which she could get by turning her diamonds into paste.
It is such a pity! Now, you remember the sudden end of the engagement between the Honourable Miss Miles and Colonel Dorking?
Only two days before the wedding, there was a paragraph in the _Morning Post_ to say that it was all off.
And why? It is almost incredible, but the absurd sum of twelve hundred pounds would have settled the whole question.
Is it not pitiful? And here I find you, a man of sense, boggling about terms, when your client's future and honour are at stake.
"What I say is true," Holmes answered. "The money cannot be found. Surely it is better for you to take the substantial sum which I offer than to ruin this woman's career, which can profit you in no way?"
There you make a mistake, Mr. Holmes. An exposure would profit me indirectly to a considerable extent.
I have eight or ten similar cases maturing. If it was circulated among them that I had made a severe example of the Lady Eva, I should find all of them much more open to reason.
Milverton had glided as quick as a rat to the side of the room and stood with his back against the wall.
"Mr. Holmes, Mr. Holmes," he said, turning the front of his coat and exhibiting the butt of a large revolver, which projected from the inside pocket.
I have been expecting you to do something original. This has been done so often, and what good has ever come from it?
I assure you that I am armed to the teeth, and I am perfectly prepared to use my weapons, knowing that the law will support me.
Besides, your supposition that I would bring the letters here in a notebook is entirely mistaken. I would do nothing so foolish.
And now, gentlemen, I have one or two little interviews this evening, and it is a long drive to Hampstead.
He stepped forward, took up his coat, laid his hand on his revolver, and turned to the door. I picked up a chair, but Holmes shook his head, and I laid it down again.
With bow, a smile, and a twinkle, Milverton was out of the room, and a few moments after we heard the slam of the carriage door and the rattle of the wheels as he drove away.
Holmes sat motionless by the fire, his hands buried deep in his trouser pockets, his chin sunk upon his breast, his eyes fixed upon the glowing embers.
For half an hour he was silent and still. Then, with the gesture of a man who has taken his decision, he sprang to his feet and passed into his bedroom.
A little later a rakish young workman, with a goatee beard and a swagger, lit his clay pipe at the lamp before descending into the street.
"I'll be back some time, Watson," said he, and vanished into the night. I understood that he had opened his campaign against Charles Augustus Milverton, but I little dreamed the strange shape which that campaign was destined to take.
For some days Holmes came and went at all hours in this attire, but beyond a remark that his time was spent at Hampstead, and that it was not wasted, I knew nothing of what he was doing.
At last, however, on a wild, tempestuous evening, when the wind screamed and rattled against the windows, he returned from his last expedition, and having removed his disguise he sat before the fire and laughed heartily in his silent inward fashion.
It was a most necessary step. I am a plumber with a rising business, Escott, by name. I have walked out with her each evening, and I have talked with her.
Good heavens, those talks! However, I have got all I wanted. I know Milverton's house as I know the palm of my hand.
You can't help it, my dear Watson. You must play your cards as best you can when such a stake is on the table.
However, I rejoice to say that I have a hated rival, who will certainly cut me out the instant that my back is turned.
I had a catching of the breath, and my skin went cold at the words, which were slowly uttered in a tone of concentrated resolution.
As a flash of lightning in the night shows up in an instant every detail of a wild landscape, so at one glance I seemed to see every possible result of such an action-the detection, the capture, the honoured career ending in irreparable failure and disgrace, my friend himself lying at the mercy of the odious Milverton.
My dear fellow, I have given it every consideration. I am never precipitate in my actions, nor would I adopt so energetic and, indeed, so dangerous a course, if any other were possible.
Let us look at the matter clearly and fairly. I suppose that you will admit that the action is morally justifiable, though technically criminal.
To burgle his house is no more than to forcibly take his pocketbook-an action in which you were prepared to aid me.
"Yes," I said, "it is morally justifiable so long as our object is to take no articles save those which are used for an illegal purpose."
Exactly. Since it is morally justifiable, I have only to consider the question of personal risk. Surely a gentleman should not lay much stress upon this, when a lady is in most desperate need of his help?
Well, that is part of the risk. There is no other possible way of regaining these letters. The unfortunate lady has not the money, and there are none of her people in whom she could confide.
To-morrow is the last day of grace, and unless we can get the letters to-night, this villain will be as good as his word and will bring about her ruin.
I must, therefore, abandon my client to her fate or I must play this last card. Between ourselves, Watson, it's a sporting duel between this fellow Milverton and me.
He had, as you saw, the best of the first exchanges, but my self-respect and my reputation are concerned to fight it to a finish.
"Then you are not going," said I. "I give you my word of honour-and I never broke it in my life-that I will take a cab straight to the police-station and give you away, unless you let me share this adventure with you."
How do you know that? You can't tell what may happen. Anyway, my resolution is taken. Other people besides you have self-respect, and even reputations.
Well, well, my dear fellow, be it so. We have shared this same room for some years, and it would be amusing if we ended by sharing the same cell.
You know, Watson, I don't mind confessing to you that I have always had an idea that I would have made a highly efficient criminal.
This is the chance of my lifetime in that direction. See here!" He took a neat little leather case out of a drawer, and opening it he exhibited a number of shining instruments.
This is a first-class, up-to-date burgling kit, with nickel-plated jemmy, diamond-tipped glass-cutter, adaptable keys, and every modern improvement which the march of civilization demands.
I can see that you have a strong, natural turn for this sort of thing. Very good, do you make the masks.
We shall have some cold supper before we start. It is now nine-thirty. At eleven we shall drive as far as Church Row.
It is a quarter of an hour's walk from there to Appledore Towers. We shall be at work before midnight.
Milverton is a heavy sleeper, and retires punctually at ten-thirty. With any luck we should be back here by two, with the Lady Eva's letters in my pocket.
Holmes and I put on our dress-clothes, so that we might appear to be two theatre-goers homeward bound.
In Oxford Street we picked up a hansom and drove to an address in Hampstead. Here we paid off our cab, and with our great coats buttoned up, for it was bitterly cold, and the wind seemed to blow through us, we walked along the edge of the heath.
"It's a business that needs delicate treatment," said Holmes. "These documents are contained in a safe in the fellow's study, and the study is the ante-room of his bed-chamber.
On the other hand, like all these stout, little men who do themselves well, he is a plethoric sleeper.
He has a secretary who is devoted to his interests, and never budges from the study all day. That's why we are going at night.
Then he has a beast of a dog which roams the garden. I met Agatha late the last two evenings, and she locks the brute up so as to give me a clear run.
This is the house, this big one in its own grounds. Through the gate-now to the right among the laurels.
We might put on our masks here, I think. You see, there is not a glimmer of light in any of the windows, and everything is working splendidly.
With our black silk face-coverings, which turned us into two of the most truculent figures in London, we stole up to the silent, gloomy house.
"That's his bedroom," Holmes whispered. "This door opens straight into the study. It would suit us best, but it is bolted as well as locked, and we should make too much noise getting in.
The place was locked, but Holmes removed a circle of glass and turned the key from the inside. An instant afterwards he had closed the door behind us, and we had become felons in the eyes of the law.
The thick, warm air of the conservatory and the rich, choking fragrance of exotic plants took us by the throat.
He seized my hand in the darkness and led me swiftly past banks of shrubs which brushed against our faces.
He felt his way among the furniture, opened another door, and closed it behind us. Putting out my hand I felt several coats hanging from the wall, and I understood that I was in a passage.
A fire was burning in this new room, and again the air was heavy with tobacco smoke. Holmes entered on tiptoe, waited for me to follow, and then very gently closed the door.
It was a good fire, and the room was illuminated by it. Near the door I saw the gleam of an electric switch, but it was unnecessary, even if it had been safe, to turn it on.
At one side of the fireplace was a heavy curtain which covered the bay window we had seen from outside.
On the other side was the door which communicated with the veranda. A desk stood in the centre, with a turning-chair of shining red leather.
Holmes stole across and looked at it. Then he crept to the door of the bedroom, and stood with slanting head listening intently.
No sound came from within. Meanwhile it had struck me that it would be wise to secure our retreat through the outer door, so I examined it.
To my amazement, it was neither locked nor bolted. I touched Holmes on the arm, and he turned his masked face in that direction.
"I don't like it," he whispered, putting his lips to my very ear. "I can't quite make it out. Anyhow, we have no time to lose."
Yes, stand by the door. If you hear anyone come, bolt it on the inside, and we can get away as we came.
If they come the other way, we can get through the door if our job is done, or hide behind these window curtains if it is not.
I nodded, and stood by the door. My first feeling of fear had passed away, and I thrilled now with a keener zest than I had ever enjoyed when we were the defenders of the law instead of its defiers.
The high object of our mission, the consciousness that it was unselfish and chivalrous, the villainous character of our opponent, all added to the sporting interest of the adventure.
Turning up the cuffs of his dress-coat-he had placed his overcoat on a chair-Holmes laid out two drills, a jemmy, and several skeleton keys.
I stood at the centre door with my eyes glancing at each of the others, ready for any emergency, though, indeed, my plans were somewhat vague as to what I should do if we were interrupted.
For half an hour, Holmes worked with concentrated energy, laying down one tool, picking up another, handling each with the strength and delicacy of the trained mechanic.
Finally I heard a click, the broad green door swung open, and inside I had a glimpse of a number of paper packets, each tied, sealed, and inscribed.
Suddenly I saw him halt, listen intently, and then in an instant he had swung the door of the safe to, picked up his coat, stuffed his tools into the pockets, and darted behind the window curtain, motioning me to do the same.
It was only when I had joined him there that I heard what had alarmed his quicker senses. There was a noise somewhere within the house.
A door slammed in the distance. Then a confused, dull murmur broke itself into the measured thud of heavy footsteps rapidly approaching.
They were in the passage outside the room. They paused at the door. The door opened. There was a sharp snick as the electric light was turned on.
The door closed once more, and the pungent reek of a strong cigar was borne to our nostrils. Then the footsteps continued backward and forward, backward and forward, within a few yards of us.
Finally there was a creak from a chair, and the footsteps ceased. Then a key clicked in a lock, and I heard the rustle of papers.
So far I had not dared to look out, but now I gently parted the division of the curtains in front of me and peeped through.
From the pressure of Holmes's shoulder against mine, I knew that he was sharing my observations. Right in front of us, and almost within our reach, was the broad, rounded back of Milverton.
His broad, grizzled head, with its shining patch of baldness, was in the immediate foreground of our vision.
He was leaning far back in the red leather chair, his legs outstretched, a long, black cigar projecting at an angle from his mouth.
I felt Holmes's hand steal into mine and give me a reassuring shake, as if to say that the situation was within his powers, and that he was easy in his mind.
I was not sure whether he had seen what was only too obvious from my position, that the door of the safe was imperfectly closed, and that Milverton might at any moment observe it.
But Milverton never looked up. He was languidly interested by the papers in his hand, and page after page was turned as he followed the argument of the lawyer.
At least, I thought, when he has finished the document and the cigar he will go to his room, but before he had reached the end of either, there came a remarkable development, which turned our thoughts into quite another channel.
Several times I had observed that Milverton looked at his watch, and once he had risen and sat down again, with a gesture of impatience.
The idea, however, that he might have an appointment at so strange an hour never occurred to me until a faint sound reached my ears from the veranda outside.
Milverton dropped his papers and sat rigid in his chair. The sound was repeated, and then there came a gentle tap at the door.
So this was the explanation of the unlocked door and of the nocturnal vigil of Milverton. There was the gentle rustle of a woman's dress.
I had closed the slit between the curtains as Milverton's face had turned in our direction, but now I ventured very carefully to open it once more.
He had resumed his seat, the cigar still projecting at an insolent angle from the corner of his mouth.
In front of him, in the full glare of the electric light, there stood a tall, slim, dark woman, a veil over her face, a mantle drawn round her chin.
Her breath came quick and fast, and every inch of the lithe figure was quivering with strong emotion.
"Well," said Milverton, "you made me lose a good night's rest, my dear. I hope you'll prove worth it.
Well, if you couldn't you couldn't. If the Countess is a hard mistress, you have your chance to get level with her now.
Bless the girl, what are you shivering about? That's right. Pull yourself together. Now, let us get down to business.
He took a notebook from the drawer of his desk. "You say that you have five letters which compromise the Countess d'Albert.
You want to sell them. I want to buy them. So far so good. It only remains to fix a price. I should want to inspect the letters, of course.
The woman, without a word, had raised her veil and dropped the mantle from her chin. It was a dark, handsome, clear-cut face which confronted Milverton-a face with a curved nose, strong, dark eyebrows shading hard, glittering eyes, and a straight, thin-lipped mouth set in a dangerous smile.
Milverton laughed, but fear vibrated in his voice. "You were so very obstinate," said he. "Why did you drive me to such extremities?
I assure you I wouldn't hurt a fly of my own accord, but every man has his business, and what was I to do?
So you sent the letters to my husband, and he-the noblest gentleman that ever lived, a man whose boots I was never worthy to lace-he broke his gallant heart and died.
Yes, you never thought to see me here again, but it was that night which taught me how I could meet you face to face, and alone.
"Don't imagine that you can bully me," said he, rising to his feet. "I have only to raise my voice and I could call my servants and have you arrested.
But I will make allowance for your natural anger. Leave the room at once as you came, and I will say no more.
You will ruin no more lives as you have ruined mine. You will wring no more hearts as you wrung mine.
She had drawn a little gleaming revolver, and emptied barrel after barrel into Milverton's body, the muzzle within two feet of his shirt front.
He shrank away and then fell forward upon the table, coughing furiously and clawing among the papers.
Then he staggered to his feet, received another shot, and rolled upon the floor. "You've done me," he cried, and lay still.
The woman looked at him intently, and ground her heel into his upturned face. She looked again, but there was no sound or movement.
But hardly had the woman rushed from the room when Holmes, with swift, silent steps, was over at the other door.
He turned the key in the lock. At the same instant we heard voices in the house and the sound of hurrying feet.
The revolver shots had roused the household. With perfect coolness Holmes slipped across to the safe, filled his two arms with bundles of letters, and poured them all into the fire.
Again and again he did it, until the safe was empty. Someone turned the handle and beat upon the outside of the door.
Holmes looked swiftly round. The letter which had been the messenger of death for Milverton lay, all mottled with his blood, upon the table.
Holmes tossed it in among the blazing papers. Then he drew the key from the outer door, passed through after me, and locked it on the outside.
I could not have believed that an alarm could have spread so swiftly. Looking back, the huge house was one blaze of light.
Holmes seemed to know the grounds perfectly, and he threaded his way swiftly among a plantation of small trees, I close at his heels, and our foremost pursuer panting behind us.
I fell upon my face among some bushes, but Holmes had me on my feet in an instant, and together we dashed away across the huge expanse of Hampstead Heath.
We had run two miles, I suppose, before Holmes at last halted and listened intently. All was absolute silence behind us.
We had breakfasted and were smoking our morning pipe on the day after the remarkable experience which I have recorded, when Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, very solemn and impressive, was ushered into our modest sitting-room.
I thought that, perhaps, if you had nothing particular on hand, you might care to assist us in a most remarkable case, which occurred only last night at Hampstead.
It is no ordinary crime. We have had our eyes upon this Mr. Milverton for some time, and, between ourselves, he was a bit of a villain.
He is known to have held papers which he used for blackmailing purposes. These papers have all been burned by the murderers.
No article of value was taken, as it is probable that the criminals were men of good position, whose sole object was to prevent social exposure.
Yes, there were two of them. They were as nearly as possible captured red-handed. We have their footmarks, we have their description, it's ten to one that we trace them.
The first fellow was a bit too active, but the second was caught by the under-gardener, and only got away after a struggle.
No, it's no use arguing. I have made up my mind. My sympathies are with the criminals rather than with the victim, and I will not handle this case.
We were in the middle of our lunch, when he suddenly sprang to his feet. "By Jove, Watson, I've got it!"
Here, on the left hand, there stands a shop window filled with photographs of the celebrities and beauties of the day.
Holmes's eyes fixed themselves upon one of them, and following his gaze I saw the picture of a regal and stately lady in Court dress, with a high diamond tiara upon her noble head.
I looked at that delicately curved nose, at the marked eyebrows, at the straight mouth, and the strong little chin beneath it.
Then I caught my breath as I read the time-honoured title of the great nobleman and statesman whose wife she had been.
In return for the news which Lestrade would bring, Holmes was always ready to listen with attention to the details of any case upon which the detective was engaged, and was able occasionally, without any active interference, to give some hint or suggestion drawn from his own vast knowledge and experience.
On this particular evening, Lestrade had spoken of the weather and the newspapers. Then he had fallen silent, puffing thoughtfully at his cigar.
Well, Mr. Holmes, there is no use denying that there is something on my mind. And yet it is such an absurd business, that I hesitated to bother you about it.
On the other hand, although it is trivial, it is undoubtedly queer, and I know that you have a taste for all that is out of the common.
Madness, anyhow. And a queer madness, too. You wouldn't think there was anyone living at this time of day who had such a hatred of Napoleon the First that he would break any image of him that he could see.
Exactly. That's what I said. But then, when the man commits burglary in order to break images which are not his own, that brings it away from the doctor and on to the policeman.
His residence and principal consulting-room is at Kennington Road, but he has a branch surgery and dispensary at Lower Brixton Road, two miles away.
This Dr. Barnicot is an enthusiastic admirer of Napoleon, and his house is full of books, pictures, and relics of the French Emperor.
Some little time ago he purchased from Morse Hudson two duplicate plaster casts of the famous head of Napoleon by the French sculptor, Devine.
One of these he placed in his hall in the house at Kennington Road, and the other on the mantelpiece of the surgery at Lower Brixton.
Well, when Dr. Barnicot came down this morning he was astonished to find that his house had been burgled during the night, but that nothing had been taken save the plaster head from the hall.
It had been carried out and had been dashed savagely against the garden wall, under which its splintered fragments were discovered.
It had been smashed to atoms where it stood. In neither case were there any signs which could give us a clue as to the criminal or lunatic who had done the mischief.
"They are singular, not to say grotesque," said Holmes. "May I ask whether the two busts smashed in Dr. Barnicot's rooms were the exact duplicates of the one which was destroyed in Morse Hudson's shop?"
Such a fact must tell against the theory that the man who breaks them is influenced by any general hatred of Napoleon.
Considering how many hundreds of statues of the great Emperor must exist in London, it is too much to suppose such a coincidence as that a promiscuous iconoclast should chance to begin upon three specimens of the same bust.
So, although, as you say, there are many hundreds of statues in London, it is very probable that these three were the only ones in that district.
I don't attempt to do so. I would only observe that there is a certain method in the gentleman's eccentric proceedings.
The affair seems absurdly trifling, and yet I dare call nothing trivial when I reflect that some of my most classic cases have had the least promising commencement.
You will remember, Watson, how the dreadful business of the Abernetty family was first brought to my notice by the depth which the parsley had sunk into the butter upon a hot day.
I can't afford, therefore, to smile at your three broken busts, Lestrade, and I shall be very much obliged to you if you will let me hear of any fresh development of so singular a chain of events.
The development for which my friend had asked came in a quicker and an infinitely more tragic form than he could have imagined.
I was still dressing in my bedroom next morning, when there was a tap at the door and Holmes entered, a telegram in his hand.
Don't know-may be anything. But I suspect it is the sequel of the story of the statues. In that case our friend the image-breaker has begun operations in another quarter of London.
In half an hour we had reached Pitt Street, a quiet little backwater just beside one of the briskest currents of London life.
No. 131 was one of a row, all flat-chested, respectable, and most unromantic dwellings. As we drove up, we found the railings in front of the house lined by a curious crowd.
By George! It's attempted murder at the least. Nothing less will hold the London message-boy. There's a deed of violence indicated in that fellow's round shoulders and outstretched neck.
What's this, Watson? The top steps swilled down and the other ones dry. Footsteps enough, anyhow! Well, well, there's Lestrade at the front window, and we shall soon know all about it.
The official received us with a very grave face and showed us into a sitting-room, where an exceedingly unkempt and agitated elderly man, clad in a flannel dressing-gown, was pacing up and down.
"It's the Napoleon bust business again," said Lestrade. "You seemed interested last night, Mr. Holmes, so I thought perhaps you would be glad to be present now that the affair has taken a very much graver turn."
If I had come in here as a journalist, I should have interviewed myself and had two columns in every evening paper.
As it is, I am giving away valuable copy by telling my story over and over to a string of different people, and I can make no use of it myself.
However, I've heard your name, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and if you'll only explain this queer business, I shall be paid for my trouble in telling you the story.
You can see for yourself that anyone going out through that open window could reach the front doorstep by taking a long stride.
This was clearly what the burglar had done, so I went round and opened the door. Stepping out into the dark, I nearly fell over a dead man, who was lying there.
I ran back for a light and there was the poor fellow, a great gash in his throat and the whole place swimming in blood.
He lay on his back, his knees drawn up, and his mouth horribly open. I shall see him in my dreams. I had just time to blow on my police-whistle, and then I must have fainted, for I knew nothing more until I found the policeman standing over me in the hall.
"There's nothing to show who he was," said Lestrade. "You shall see the body at the mortuary, but we have made nothing of it up to now.
He is a tall man, sunburned, very powerful, not more than thirty. He is poorly dressed, and yet does not appear to be a labourer.
A horn-handled clasp knife was lying in a pool of blood beside him. Whether it was the weapon which did the deed, or whether it belonged to the dead man, I do not know.
There was no name on his clothing, and nothing in his pockets save an apple, some string, a shilling map of London, and a photograph.
It was evidently taken by a snapshot from a small camera. It represented an alert, sharp-featured simian man, with thick eyebrows and a very peculiar projection of the lower part of the face, like the muzzle of a baboon.
We had news of it just before you came. It has been found in the front garden of an empty house in Campden House Road.
"Certainly. I must just take one look round." He examined the carpet and the window. "The fellow had either very long legs or was a most active man," said he.
With an area beneath, it was no mean feat to reach that window ledge and open that window. Getting back was comparatively simple.
"I must try and make something of it," said he, "though I have no doubt that the first editions of the evening papers are out already with full details.
It lay scattered, in splintered shards, upon the grass. Holmes picked up several of them and examined them carefully.
"We have a long way to go yet," said he. "And yet-and yet-well, we have some suggestive facts to act upon.
The possession of this trifling bust was worth more, in the eyes of this strange criminal, than a human life.
That is one point. Then there is the singular fact that he did not break it in the house, or immediately outside the house, if to break it was his sole object.
Well, that's likely enough. But I wish to call your attention very particularly to the position of this house, in the garden of which the bust was destroyed.
Yes, but there is another empty house farther up the street which he must have passed before he came to this one.
Why did he not break it there, since it is evident that every yard that he carried it increased the risk of someone meeting him?
"By Jove! that's true," said the detective. "Now that I come to think of it, Dr. Barnicot's bust was broken not far from his red lamp.
To remember it-to docket it. We may come on something later which will bear upon it. What steps do you propose to take now, Lestrade?
The most practical way of getting at it, in my opinion, is to identify the dead man. There should be no difficulty about that.
Oh, you must not let me influence you in any way. I suggest that you go on your line and I on mine. We can compare notes afterwards, and each will supplement the other.
Don't I? Well, perhaps I don't. But I am sure that it will interest Mr. Horace Harker and the subscribers of the Central Press Syndicate.
Sherlock Holmes and I walked together to the High Street, where we stopped at the shop of Harding Brothers, whence the bust had been purchased.
A young assistant informed us that Mr. Harding would be absent until afternoon, and that he was himself a newcomer, who could give us no information.
"Well, well, we can't expect to have it all our own way, Watson," he said, at last. "We must come back in the afternoon, if Mr. Harding will not be here until then.
I am, as you have no doubt surmised, endeavouring to trace these busts to their source, in order to find if there is not something peculiar which may account for their remarkable fate.
Let us make for Mr. Morse Hudson, of the Kennington Road, and see if he can throw any light upon the problem.
A drive of an hour brought us to the picture-dealer's establishment. He was a small, stout man with a red face and a peppery manner.
"Yes, sir. On my very counter, sir," said he. "What we pay rates and taxes for I don't know, when any ruffian can come in and break one's goods.
Yes, sir, it was I who sold Dr. Barnicot his two statues. Disgraceful, sir! A Nihilist plot-that's what I make it.
No one but an anarchist would go about breaking statues. Red republicans-that's what I call 'em. Who did I get the statues from?
They are a well-known house in the trade, and have been this twenty years. How many had I? Three-two and one are three-two of Dr. Barnicot's, and one smashed in broad daylight on my own counter.
Do I know that photograph? No, I don't. Yes, I do, though. Why, it's Beppo. He was a kind of Italian piece-work man, who made himself useful in the shop.
He could carve a bit, and gild and frame, and do odd jobs. The fellow left me last week, and I've heard nothing of him since.
No, I don't know where he came from nor where he went to. I had nothing against him while he was here.
"Well, that's all we could reasonably expect from Morse Hudson," said Holmes, as we emerged from the shop.
We have this Beppo as a common factor, both in Kennington and in Kensington, so that is worth a ten-mile drive.
Here, in a broad thoroughfare, once the abode of wealthy City merchants, we found the sculpture works for which we searched.
Outside was a considerable yard full of monumental masonry. Inside was a large room in which fifty workers were carving or moulding.
The manager, a big blond German, received us civilly and gave a clear answer to all Holmes's questions.
There was no reason why those six should be different from any of the other casts. He could suggest no possible cause why anyone should wish to destroy them-in fact, he laughed at the idea.
The work was usually done by Italians, in the room we were in. When finished, the busts were put on a table in the passage to dry, and afterwards stored.
But the production of the photograph had a remarkable effect upon the manager. His face flushed with anger, and his brows knotted over his blue Teutonic eyes.
"Ah, the rascal!" he cried. "Yes, indeed, I know him very well. This has always been a respectable establishment, and the only time that we have ever had the police in it was over this very fellow.
It was more than a year ago now. He knifed another Italian in the street, and then he came to the works with the police on his heels, and he was taken here.
Beppo was his name-his second name I never knew. Serve me right for engaging a man with such a face. But he was a good workman-one of the best.
The man lived and he got off with a year. I have no doubt he is out now, but he has not dared to show his nose here.
"No, no," cried Holmes, "not a word to the cousin-not a word, I beg of you. The matter is very important, and the farther I go with it, the more important it seems to grow.
When you referred in your ledger to the sale of those casts I observed that the date was June 3rd of last year.
"I could tell you roughly by the pay-list," the manager answered. "Yes," he continued, after some turning over of pages, "he was paid last on May 20th."
"Thank you," said Holmes. "I don't think that I need intrude upon your time and patience any more." With a last word of caution that he should say nothing as to our researches, we turned our faces westward once more.
The afternoon was far advanced before we were able to snatch a hasty luncheon at a restaurant. A news-bill at the entrance announced "Kensington Outrage.
Murder by a Madman," and the contents of the paper showed that Mr. Horace Harker had got his account into print after all.
Two columns were occupied with a highly sensational and flowery rendering of the whole incident. Holmes propped it against the cruet-stand and read it while he ate.
The Press, Watson, is a most valuable institution, if you only know how to use it. And now, if you have quite finished, we will hark back to Kensington and see what the manager of Harding Brothers has to say on the matter.
The founder of that great emporium proved to be a brisk, crisp little person, very dapper and quick, with a clear head and a ready tongue.
Yes, sir, I have already read the account in the evening papers. Mr. Horace Harker is a customer of ours.
They are all sold now. To whom? Oh, I daresay by consulting our sales book we could very easily tell you.
Yes, we have the entries here. One to Mr. Harker you see, and one to Mr. Josiah Brown, of Laburnum Lodge, Laburnum Vale, Chiswick, and one to Mr. Sandeford, of Lower Grove Road, Reading.
No, I have never seen this face which you show me in the photograph. You would hardly forget it, would you, sir, for I've seldom seen an uglier.
Have we any Italians on the staff? Yes, sir, we have several among our workpeople and cleaners. I daresay they might get a peep at that sales book if they wanted to.
There is no particular reason for keeping a watch upon that book. Well, well, it's a very strange business, and I hope that you will let me know if anything comes of your inquiries.
Holmes had taken several notes during Mr. Harding's evidence, and I could see that he was thoroughly satisfied by the turn which affairs were taking.
He made no remark, however, save that, unless we hurried, we should be late for our appointment with Lestrade.
Sure enough, when we reached Baker Street the detective was already there, and we found him pacing up and down in a fever of impatience.
"We have had a very busy day, and not entirely a wasted one," my friend explained. "We have seen both the retailers and also the wholesale manufacturers.
"The busts," cried Lestrade. "Well, well, you have your own methods, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and it is not for me to say a word against them, but I think I have done a better day's work than you.
Inspector Hill knew him the moment he caught sight of him. His name is Pietro Venucci, from Naples, and he is one of the greatest cut-throats in London.
He is connected with the Mafia, which, as you know, is a secret political society, enforcing its decrees by murder.
Now, you see how the affair begins to clear up. The other fellow is probably an Italian also, and a member of the Mafia.
He has broken the rules in some fashion. Pietro is set upon his track. Probably the photograph we found in his pocket is the man himself, so that he may not knife the wrong person.
He dogs the fellow, he sees him enter a house, he waits outside for him, and in the scuffle he receives his own death-wound.
"Excellent, Lestrade, excellent!" he cried. "But I didn't quite follow your explanation of the destruction of the busts."
The busts! You never can get those busts out of your head. After all, that is nothing; petty larceny, six months at the most.
It is the murder that we are really investigating, and I tell you that I am gathering all the threads into my hands.
Is a very simple one. I shall go down with Hill to the Italian Quarter, find the man whose photograph we have got, and arrest him on the charge of murder.
I think not. I fancy we can attain our end in a simpler way. I can't say for certain, because it all depends-well, it all depends upon a factor which is completely outside our control.
But I have great hopes-in fact, the betting is exactly two to one-that if you will come with us to-night I shall be able to help you to lay him by the heels.
And now I think that a few hours' sleep would do us all good, for I do not propose to leave before eleven o'clock, and it is unlikely that we shall be back before morning.
You'll dine with us, Lestrade, and then you are welcome to the sofa until it is time for us to start.
In the meantime, Watson, I should be glad if you would ring for an express messenger, for I have a letter to send and it is important that it should go at once.
Holmes spent the evening in rummaging among the files of the old daily papers with which one of our lumber-rooms was packed.
When at last he descended, it was with triumph in his eyes, but he said nothing to either of us as to the result of his researches.
I was not surprised when Holmes suggested that I should take my revolver with me. He had himself picked up the loaded hunting-crop, which was his favourite weapon.
A four-wheeler was at the door at eleven, and in it we drove to a spot at the other side of Hammersmith Bridge.
Here the cabman was directed to wait. A short walk brought us to a secluded road fringed with pleasant houses, each standing in its own grounds.
The wooden fence which separated the grounds from the road threw a dense black shadow upon the inner side, and here it was that we crouched.
"I fear that you'll have a long wait," Holmes whispered. "We may thank our stars that it is not raining.
I don't think we can even venture to smoke to pass the time. However, it's a two to one chance that we get something to pay us for our trouble.
It proved, however, that our vigil was not to be so long as Holmes had led us to fear, and it ended in a very sudden and singular fashion.
In an instant, without the least sound to warn us of his coming, the garden gate swung open, and a lithe, dark figure, as swift and active as an ape, rushed up the garden path.
We saw it whisk past the light thrown from over the door and disappear against the black shadow of the house.
There was a long pause, during which we held our breath, and then a very gentle creaking sound came to our ears.
The window was being opened. The noise ceased, and again there was a long silence. The fellow was making his way into the house.
We saw the sudden flash of a dark lantern inside the room. What he sought was evidently not there, for again we saw the flash through another blind, and then through another.
But before we could move, the man had emerged again. As he came out into the glimmering patch of light, we saw that he carried something white under his arm.
The man was so intent upon what he was doing that he never heard our steps as we stole across the grass plot.
With the bound of a tiger Holmes was on his back, and an instant later Lestrade and I had him by either wrist, and the handcuffs had been fastened.
As we turned him over I saw a hideous, sallow face, with writhing, furious features, glaring up at us, and I knew that it was indeed the man of the photograph whom we had secured.
But it was not our prisoner to whom Holmes was giving his attention. Squatted on the doorstep, he was engaged in most carefully examining that which the man had brought from the house.
It was a bust of Napoleon, like the one which we had seen that morning, and it had been broken into similar fragments.
Carefully Holmes held each separate shard to the light, but in no way did it differ from any other shattered piece of plaster.
He had just completed his examination when the hall lights flew up, the door opened, and the owner of the house, a jovial, rotund figure in shirt and trousers, presented himself.
Yes, sir; and you, no doubt, are Mr. Sherlock Holmes? I had the note which you sent by the express messenger, and I did exactly what you told me.
We locked every door on the inside and awaited developments. Well, I'm very glad to see that you have got the rascal.
However, Lestrade was anxious to get his man into safe quarters, so within a few minutes our cab had been summoned and we were all four upon our way to London.
Not a word would our captive say, but he glared at us from the shadow of his matted hair, and once, when my hand seemed within his reach, he snapped at it like a hungry wolf.
We stayed long enough at the police-station to learn that a search of his clothing revealed nothing save a few shillings and a long sheath knife, the handle of which bore copious traces of recent blood.
"That's all right," said Lestrade, as we parted. "Hill knows all these gentry, and he will give a name to him.
You'll find that my theory of the Mafia will work out all right. But I'm sure I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mr. Holmes, for the workmanlike way in which you laid hands upon him.
If ever I permit you to chronicle any more of my little problems, Watson, I foresee that you will enliven your pages by an account of the singular adventure of the Napoleonic busts.
When we met again next evening, Lestrade was furnished with much information concerning our prisoner.
His name, it appeared, was Beppo, second name unknown. He was a well-known ne'er-do-well among the Italian colony.
Yes, sir, I fear that I am a little late, but the trains were awkward. You wrote to me about a bust that is in my possession.
I have your letter here. You said, 'I desire to possess a copy of Devine's Napoleon, and am prepared to pay you ten pounds for the one which is in your possession.'
I was very much surprised at your letter, for I could not imagine how you knew that I owned such a thing.
Of course you must have been surprised, but the explanation is very simple. Mr. Harding, of Harding Brothers, said that they had sold you their last copy, and he gave me your address.
I am sure the scruple does you honour, Mr. Sandeford. But I have named that price, so I intend to stick to it.
Well, it is very handsome of you, Mr. Holmes. I brought the bust up with me, as you asked me to do. Here it is!
He opened his bag, and at last we saw placed upon our table a complete specimen of that bust which we had already seen more than once in fragments.
You will kindly sign that paper, Mr. Sandeford, in the presence of these witnesses. It is simply to say that you transfer every possible right that you ever had in the bust to me.
I am a methodical man, you see, and you never know what turn events might take afterwards. Thank you, Mr. Sandeford; here is your money, and I wish you a very good evening.
When our visitor had disappeared, Sherlock Holmes's movements were such as to rivet our attention. He began by taking a clean white cloth from a drawer and laying it over the table.
Then he placed his newly acquired bust in the centre of the cloth. Finally, he picked up his hunting-crop and struck Napoleon a sharp blow on the top of the head.
The figure broke into fragments, and Holmes bent eagerly over the shattered remains. Next instant, with a loud shout of triumph he held up one splinter, in which a round, dark object was fixed like a plum in a pudding.
Lestrade and I sat silent for a moment, and then, with a spontaneous impulse, we both broke at clapping, as at the well-wrought crisis of a play.
A flush of colour sprang to Holmes's pale cheeks, and he bowed to us like the master dramatist who receives the homage of his audience.
It was at such moments that for an instant he ceased to be a reasoning machine, and betrayed his human love for admiration and applause.
The same singularly proud and reserved nature which turned away with disdain from popular notoriety was capable of being moved to its depths by spontaneous wonder and praise from a friend.
The main fact is that he had the pearl, and at that moment, when it was on his person, he was pursued by the police.
He made for the factory in which he worked, and he knew that he had only a few minutes in which to conceal this enormously valuable prize, which would otherwise be found on him when he was searched.
It was an admirable hiding-place. No one could possibly find it. But Beppo was condemned to a year's imprisonment, and in the meanwhile his six busts were scattered over London.
Beppo did not despair, and he conducted his search with considerable ingenuity and perseverance. Through a cousin who works with Gelder, he found out the retail firms who had bought the busts.
He managed to find employment with Morse Hudson, and in that way tracked down three of them. The pearl was not there.
Then, with the help of some Italian employee, he succeeded in finding out where the other three busts had gone.
The first was at Harker's. There he was dogged by his confederate, who held Beppo responsible for the loss of the pearl, and he stabbed him in the scuffle which followed.
As a means of tracing him, if he wished to inquire about him from any third person. That was the obvious reason.
Since Harker's bust was one in three, the chances were exactly as I told you-two to one against the pearl being inside it.
By that time, of course, I knew for certain that it was the Borgia pearl that we were after. The name of the murdered man linked the one event with the other.
There only remained a single bust-the Reading one-and the pearl must be there. I bought it in your presence from the owner-and there it lies.
"Well," said Lestrade, "I've seen you handle a good many cases, Mr. Holmes, but I don't know that I ever knew a more workmanlike one than that.
We're not jealous of you at Scotland Yard. No, sir, we are very proud of you, and if you come down to-morrow, there's not a man, from the oldest inspector to the youngest constable, who wouldn't be glad to shake you by the hand.
"Thank you!" said Holmes. "Thank you!" and as he turned away, it seemed to me that he was more nearly moved by the softer human emotions than I had ever seen him.
A moment later he was the cold and practical thinker once more. "Put the pearl in the safe, Watson," said he, "and get out the papers of the Conk-Singleton forgery case.
Good-bye, Lestrade. If any little problem comes your way, I shall be happy, if I can, to give you a hint or two as to its solution.
It will be obvious that any details which would help the reader exactly to identify the college or the criminal would be injudicious and offensive.
I will endeavour, in my statement, to avoid such terms as would serve to limit the events to any particular place, or give a clue as to the people concerned.
Here it was that one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance, Mr. Hilton Soames, tutor and lecturer at the College of St. Luke's.
Mr. Soames was a tall, spare man, of a nervous and excitable temperament. I had always known him to be restless in his manner, but on this particular occasion he was in such a state of uncontrollable agitation that it was clear something very unusual had occurred.
I trust, Mr. Holmes, that you can spare me a few hours of your valuable time. We have had a very painful incident at St. Luke's, and really, but for the happy chance of your being in town, I should have been at a loss what to do.
"I am very busy just now, and I desire no distractions," my friend answered. "I should much prefer that you called in the aid of the police."
Your discretion is as well-known as your powers, and you are the one man in the world who can help me.
My friend's temper had not improved since he had been deprived of the congenial surroundings of Baker Street.
Without his scrapbooks, his chemicals, and his homely untidiness, he was an uncomfortable man. He shrugged his shoulders in ungracious acquiescence, while our visitor in hurried words and with much excitable gesticulation poured forth his story.
The moment I looked at my table, I was aware that someone had rummaged among my papers. The proof was in three long slips.
I had left them all together. Now, I found that one of them was lying on the floor, one was on the side table near the window, and the third was where I had left it.
Bannister was very much upset by the incident. He had nearly fainted when we found that the papers had undoubtedly been tampered with.
I gave him a little brandy and left him collapsed in a chair, while I made a most careful examination of the room.
I soon saw that the intruder had left other traces of his presence besides the rumpled papers. On the table in the window were several shreds from a pencil which had been sharpened.
A broken tip of lead was lying there also. Evidently the rascal had copied the paper in a great hurry, had broken his pencil, and had been compelled to put a fresh point to it.
"Excellent!" said Holmes, who was recovering his good-humour as his attention became more engrossed by the case.
This was not all. I have a new writing-table with a fine surface of red leather. I am prepared to swear, and so is Bannister, that it was smooth and unstained.
I am convinced that these marks were left by the man who rifled the papers. There were no footmarks and no other evidence as to his identity.
I was at my wits' end, when suddenly the happy thought occurred to me that you were in the town, and I came straight round to put the matter into your hands.
"I shall be happy to look into it and to give you such advice as I can," said Holmes, rising and putting on his overcoat.
The case is not entirely devoid of interest. Had anyone visited you in your room after the papers came to you?
Yes, young Daulat Ras, an Indian student, who lives on the same stair, came in to ask me some particulars about the examination.
He was very ill, poor fellow. I left him collapsed in the chair. I was in such a hurry to come to you.
Then it amounts to this, Mr. Soames: that, unless the Indian student recognized the roll as being proofs, the man who tampered with them came upon them accidentally without knowing that they were there.
"Well," said he, "let us go round. Not one of your cases, Watson-mental, not physical. All right; come if you want to.
The sitting-room of our client opened by a long, low, latticed window on to the ancient lichen-tinted court of the old college.
A Gothic arched door led to a worn stone staircase. On the ground floor was the tutor's room. Above were three students, one on each story.
It was already twilight when we reached the scene of our problem. Holmes halted and looked earnestly at the window.
"He must have entered through the door. There is no opening except the one pane," said our learned guide.
"Dear me!" said Holmes, and he smiled in a singular way as he glanced at our companion. "Well, if there is nothing to be learned here, we had best go inside."
The lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his room. We stood at the entrance while Holmes made an examination of the carpet.
"I am afraid there are no signs here," said he. "One could hardly hope for any upon so dry a day. Your servant seems to have quite recovered.
I see. Near this little table. You can come in now. I have finished with the carpet. Let us take the little table first.
Of course, what has happened is very clear. The man entered and took the papers, sheet by sheet, from the central table.
He carried them over to the window table, because from there he could see if you came across the courtyard, and so could effect an escape.
Ah, that's good! Well, anyhow, that was in his mind. Let me see the three strips. No finger impressions-no!
Well, he carried over this one first, and he copied it. How long would it take him to do that, using every possible contraction?
Well, he wrote so furiously that he broke his pencil, and had, as you observe, to sharpen it again. This is of interest, Watson.
Look for such a pencil, Mr. Soames, and you have got your man. When I add that he possesses a large and very blunt knife, you have an additional aid.
Mr. Soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information. "I can follow the other points," said he, "but really, in this matter of the length--"
Watson, I have always done you an injustice. There are others. What could this NN be? It is at the end of a word.
You are aware that Johann Faber is the most common maker's name. Is it not clear that there is just as much of the pencil left as usually follows the Johann?
He held the small table sideways to the electric light. "I was hoping that if the paper on which he wrote was thin, some trace of it might come through upon this polished surface.
No, I see nothing. I don't think there is anything more to be learned here. Now for the central table.
This small pellet is, I presume, the black, doughy mass you spoke of. Roughly pyramidal in shape and hollowed out, I perceive.
As you say, there appear to be grains of sawdust in it. Dear me, this is very interesting. And the cut-a positive tear, I see.
It began with a thin scratch and ended in a jagged hole. I am much indebted to you for directing my attention to this case, Mr. Soames.
I should like to have a glance round. What a charming, old-fashioned room! Perhaps you will kindly wait a minute, until I have examined the floor.
As Holmes drew the curtain I was aware, from some little rigidity and alertness of his attitude, that he was prepared for an emergency.
As a matter of fact, the drawn curtain disclosed nothing but three or four suits of clothes hanging from a line of pegs.
It was a small pyramid of black, putty-like stuff, exactly like the one upon the table of the study. Holmes held it out on his open palm in the glare of the electric light.
I think it is clear enough. You came back by an unexpected way, and so he had no warning until you were at the very door.
What could he do? He caught up everything which would betray him, and he rushed into your bedroom to conceal himself.
Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, do you mean to tell me that, all the time I was talking to Bannister in this room, we had the man prisoner if we had only known it?
Surely there is another alternative, Mr. Holmes. I don't know whether you observed my bedroom window?
Lattice-paned, lead framework, three separate windows, one swinging on hinge, and large enough to admit a man.
Exactly. And it looks out on an angle of the courtyard so as to be partly invisible. The man might have effected his entrance there, left traces as he passed through the bedroom, and finally, finding the door open, have escaped that way.
"Let us be practical," said he. "I understand you to say that there are three students who use this stair, and are in the habit of passing your door?"
"It is a very delicate question," said he. "One hardly likes to throw suspicion where there are no proofs."
The top floor belongs to Miles McLaren. He is a brilliant fellow when he chooses to work-one of the brightest intellects of the university; but he is wayward, dissipated, and unprincipled.
He was nearly expelled over a card scandal in his first year. He has been idling all this term, and he must look forward with dread to the examination.
He was a little, white-faced, clean-shaven, grizzly-haired fellow of fifty. He was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of the quiet routine of his life.
Was it not very extraordinary that you should do this on the very day when there were these papers inside?
Yes, sir. Such a thing has never happened during the many years that I have been here. I nearly fainted, sir.
That is singular, because you sat down in that chair over yonder near the corner. Why did you pass these other chairs?
Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. I don't believe there is any gentleman in this university who is capable of profiting by such an action.
"Thank you, that will do," said Holmes. "Oh, one more word. You have not mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you attend that anything is amiss?"
"Your three birds are all in their nests," said Holmes, looking up. "Halloa! What's that? One of them seems restless enough."
It was the Indian, whose dark silhouette appeared suddenly upon his blind. He was pacing swiftly up and down his room.
"No difficulty in the world," Soames answered. "This set of rooms is quite the oldest in the college, and it is not unusual for visitors to go over them.
"No names, please!" said Holmes, as we knocked at Gilchrist's door. A tall, flaxen-haired, slim young fellow opened it, and made us welcome when he understood our errand.
I could not see that in either case Holmes had come upon the clue for which he was searching. Only at the third did our visit prove abortive.
The outer door would not open to our knock, and nothing more substantial than a torrent of bad language came from behind it.
"I don't care who you are. You can go to blazes!" roared the angry voice. "Tomorrow's the exam, and I won't be drawn by anyone."
"A rude fellow," said our guide, flushing with anger as we withdrew down the stair. "Of course, he did not realize that it was I who was knocking, but none the less his conduct was very uncourteous, and, indeed, under the circumstances rather suspicious."
Really, Mr. Holmes, I cannot undertake to say. He is taller than the Indian, not so tall as Gilchrist.
Our guide cried aloud in his astonishment and dismay. "Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, you are surely not going to leave me in this abrupt fashion!
You don't seem to realize the position. To-morrow is the examination. I must take some definite action to-night.
I cannot allow the examination to be held if one of the papers has been tampered with. The situation must be faced.
You must leave it as it is. I shall drop round early to-morrow morning and chat the matter over. It is possible that I may be in a position then to indicate some course of action.
You can be perfectly easy in your mind. We shall certainly find some way out of your difficulties. I will take the black clay with me, also the pencil cuttings.
When we were out in the darkness of the quadrangle, we again looked up at the windows. The Indian still paced his room.
"Well, Watson, what do you think of it?" Holmes asked, as we came out into the main street. "Quite a little parlour game-sort of three-card trick, is it not?
The foul-mouthed fellow at the top. He is the one with the worst record. And yet that Indian was a sly fellow also.
So would you, if a flock of strangers came in on you when you were preparing for an examination next day, and every moment was of value.
No, I see nothing in that. Pencils, too, and knives-all was satisfactory. But that fellow does puzzle me.
So he did me. That's the puzzling part. Why should a perfectly honest man-well, well, here's a large stationer's.
There were only four stationers of any consequences in the town, and at each Holmes produced his pencil chips, and bid high for a duplicate.
All were agreed that one could be ordered, but that it was not a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in stock.
My friend did not appear to be depressed by his failure, but shrugged his shoulders in half-humorous resignation.
No good, my dear Watson. This, the best and only final clue, has run to nothing. But, indeed, I have little doubt that we can build up a sufficient case without it.
By Jove! my dear fellow, it is nearly nine, and the landlady babbled of green peas at seven-thirty. What with your eternal tobacco, Watson, and your irregularity at meals, I expect that you will get notice to quit, and that I shall share your downfall-not, however, before we have solved the problem of the nervous tutor, the careless servant, and the three enterprising students.
Holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day, though he sat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner.
Aha! It is not for nothing that I have turned myself out of bed at the untimely hour of six. I have put in two hours' hard work and covered at least five miles, with something to show for it.
And one more this morning. It is a fair argument that wherever No. 3 came from is also the source of Nos.
The unfortunate tutor was certainly in a state of pitiable agitation when we found him in his chambers.
In a few hours the examination would commence, and he was still in the dilemma between making the facts public and allowing the culprit to compete for the valuable scholarship.
He could hardly stand still so great was his mental agitation, and he ran towards Holmes with two eager hands outstretched.
Thank heaven that you have come! I feared that you had given it up in despair. What am I to do? Shall the examination proceed?
I think so. If this matter is not to become public, we must give ourselves certain powers and resolve ourselves into a small private court-martial.
You there, if you please, Soames! Watson, you here! I'll take the armchair in the middle. I think that we are now sufficiently imposing to strike terror into a guilty breast.
"You will kindly close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Bannister, will you please tell us the truth about yesterday's incident?"
Well, then, I must make some suggestions to you. When you sat down on that chair yesterday, did you do so in order to conceal some object which would have shown who had been in the room?
"It is only a suggestion," said Holmes, suavely. "I frankly admit that I am unable to prove it. But it seems probable enough, since the moment that Mr. Soames's back was turned, you released the man who was hiding in that bedroom."
Ah, that's a pity, Bannister. Up to now you may have spoken the truth, but now I know that you have lied.
In that case, you can give us no further information. Would you please remain in the room? Stand over there near the bedroom door.
Now, Soames, I am going to ask you to have the great kindness to go up to the room of young Gilchrist, and to ask him to step down into yours.
An instant later the tutor returned, bringing with him the student. He was a fine figure of a man, tall, lithe, and agile, with a springy step and a pleasant, open face.
His troubled blue eyes glanced at each of us, and finally rested with an expression of blank dismay upon Bannister in the farther corner.
"Just close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Mr. Gilchrist, we are all quite alone here, and no one need ever know one word of what passes between us.
We can be perfectly frank with each other. We want to know, Mr. Gilchrist, how you, an honourable man, ever came to commit such an action as that of yesterday?
"No, but you have now," said Holmes. "Now, sir, you must see that after Bannister's words your position is hopeless, and that your only chance lies in a frank confession."
For a moment Gilchrist, with upraised hand, tried to control his writhing features. The next he had thrown himself on his knees beside the table, and burying his face in his hands, he had burst into a storm of passionate sobbing.
Well, when he saw that they were indeed the proofs, it was then that he yielded to temptation. He put his shoes on the table.
Holmes looked triumphantly at Bannister. "He put his gloves on the chair, and he took the proofs, sheet by sheet, to copy them.
He thought the tutor must return by the main gate and that he would see him. As we know, he came back by the side gate.
Suddenly he heard him at the very door. There was no possible escape. He forgot his gloves but he caught up his shoes and darted into the bedroom.
You observe that the scratch on that table is slight at one side, but deepens in the direction of the bedroom door.
That in itself is enough to show us that the shoe had been drawn in that direction, and that the culprit had taken refuge there.
The earth round the spike had been left on the table, and a second sample was loosened and fell in the bedroom.
Yes, sir, I have, but the shock of this disgraceful exposure has bewildered me. I have a letter here, Mr. Soames, which I wrote to you early this morning in the middle of a restless night.
It was before I knew that my sin had found me out. Here it is, sir. You will see that I have said, 'I have determined not to go in for the examination.
I have been offered a commission in the Rhodesian Police, and I am going out to South Africa at once.'
"I am indeed pleased to hear that you did not intend to profit by your unfair advantage," said Soames.
As to his escaping by that window, it was incredible. Can you not clear up the last point in this mystery, and tell us the reasons for your action?
It was simple enough, sir, if you only had known, but, with all your cleverness, it was impossible that you could know.
I knew those gloves well, and I understood their message. If Mr. Soames saw them, the game was up. I flopped down into that chair, and nothing would budge me until Mr. Soames he went for you.
"No, indeed," said Holmes, heartily, springing to his feet. "Well, Soames, I think we have cleared your little problem up, and our breakfast awaits us at home.
Come, Watson! As to you, sir, I trust that a bright future awaits you in Rhodesia. For once you have fallen low.
As I turn over the pages, I see my notes upon the repulsive story of the red leech and the terrible death of Crosby, the banker.
Here also I find an account of the Addleton tragedy, and the singular contents of the ancient British barrow.
Each of these would furnish a narrative, but on the whole I am of opinion that none of them unites so many singular points of interest as the episode of Yoxley Old Place, which includes not only the lamentable death of young Willoughby Smith, but also those subsequent developments which threw so curious a light upon the causes of the crime.
I walked to the window, and looked out on the deserted street. The occasional lamps gleamed on the expanse of muddy road and shining pavement.
"Well, Watson, it's as well we have not to turn out to-night," said Holmes, laying aside his lens and rolling up the palimpsest.
I've done enough for one sitting. It is trying work for the eyes. So far as I can make out, it is nothing more exciting than an Abbey's accounts dating from the second half of the fifteenth century.
Amid the droning of the wind there had come the stamping of a horse's hoofs, and the long grind of a wheel as it rasped against the curb.
Want? He wants us. And we, my poor Watson, want overcoats and cravats and goloshes, and every aid that man ever invented to fight the weather.
Wait a bit, though! There's the cab off again! There's hope yet. He'd have kept it if he had wanted us to come.
When the light of the hall lamp fell upon our midnight visitor, I had no difficulty in recognizing him.
It was young Stanley Hopkins, a promising detective, in whose career Holmes had several times shown a very practical interest.
"Come up, my dear sir," said Holmes's voice from above. "I hope you have no designs upon us such a night as this."
The detective mounted the stairs, and our lamp gleamed upon his shining waterproof. I helped him out of it, while Holmes knocked a blaze out of the logs in the grate.
"Now, my dear Hopkins, draw up and warm your toes," said he. "Here's a cigar, and the doctor has a prescription containing hot water and a lemon, which is good medicine on a night like this.
It is indeed, Mr. Holmes. I've had a bustling afternoon, I promise you. Did you see anything of the Yoxley case in the latest editions?
Well, it was only a paragraph, and all wrong at that, so you have not missed anything. I haven't let the grass grow under my feet.
It's down in Kent, seven miles from Chatham and three from the railway line. I was wired for at 3:15, reached Yoxley Old Place at 5, conducted my investigation, was back at Charing Cross by the last train, and straight to you by cab.
It means that I can make neither head nor tail of it. So far as I can see, it is just as tangled a business as ever I handled, and yet at first it seemed so simple that one couldn't go wrong.
There's no motive, Mr. Holmes. That's what bothers me-I can't put my hand on a motive. Here's a man dead-there's no denying that-but, so far as I can see, no reason on earth why anyone should wish him harm.
"I've got my facts pretty clear," said Stanley Hopkins. "All I want now is to know what they all mean.
The story, so far as I can make it out, is like this. Some years ago this country house, Yoxley Old Place, was taken by an elderly man, who gave the name of Professor Coram.
He was an invalid, keeping his bed half the time, and the other half hobbling round the house with a stick or being pushed about the grounds by the gardener in a Bath chair.
He was well liked by the few neighbours who called upon him, and he has the reputation down there of being a very learned man.
His household used to consist of an elderly housekeeper, Mrs. Marker, and of a maid, Susan Tarlton. These have both been with him since his arrival, and they seem to be women of excellent character.
The professor is writing a learned book, and he found it necessary, about a year ago, to engage a secretary.
The first two that he tried were not successes, but the third, Mr. Willoughby Smith, a very young man straight from the university, seems to have been just what his employer wanted.
His work consisted in writing all the morning to the professor's dictation, and he usually spent the evening in hunting up references and passages which bore upon the next day's work.
This Willoughby Smith has nothing against him, either as a boy at Uppingham or as a young man at Cambridge.
I have seen his testimonials, and from the first he was a decent, quiet, hard-working fellow, with no weak spot in him at all.
And yet this is the lad who has met his death this morning in the professor's study under circumstances which can point only to murder.
The wind howled and screamed at the windows. Holmes and I drew closer to the fire, while the young inspector slowly and point by point developed his singular narrative.
In the meantime the housekeeper had also arrived upon the scene, but she was just too late to catch the young man's dying words.
Leaving Susan with the body, she hurried to the professor's room. He was sitting up in bed, horribly agitated, for he had heard enough to convince him that something terrible had occurred.
He believes that Willoughby Smith had not an enemy in the world, and can give no reason for the crime.
His first action was to send Mortimer, the gardener, for the local police. A little later the chief constable sent for me.
Nothing was moved before I got there, and strict orders were given that no one should walk upon the paths leading to the house.
It was a splendid chance of putting your theories into practice, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. There was really nothing wanting.
"Except Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said my companion, with a somewhat bitter smile. "Well, let us hear about it.
I must ask you first, Mr. Holmes, to glance at this rough plan, which will give you a general idea of the position of the professor's study and the various points of the case.
He unfolded the rough chart, which I here reproduce, and he laid it across Holmes's knee. I rose and, standing behind Holmes, studied it over his shoulder.
My examination showed me that I was dealing with a cautious and expert criminal. No footmarks were to be found on the path.
There could be no question, however, that someone had passed along the grass border which lines the path, and that he had done so in order to avoid leaving a track.
I could not find anything in the nature of a distinct impression, but the grass was trodden down, and someone had undoubtedly passed.
It could only have been the murderer, since neither the gardener nor anyone else had been there that morning, and the rain had only begun during the night.
"It has been pouring rain and blowing a hurricane ever since," said he. "It will be harder to read now than that palimpsest.
Well, well, it can't be helped. What did you do, Hopkins, after you had made certain that you had made certain of nothing?
I come now to the body of the young man. It was found near the bureau, and just to the left of it, as marked upon that chart.
The stab was on the right side of the neck and from behind forward, so that it is almost impossible that it could have been self-inflicted.
Exactly. The idea crossed my mind. But we found the knife some feet away from the body, so that seems impossible.
Then, of course, there are the man's own dying words. And, finally, there was this very important piece of evidence which was found clasped in the dead man's right hand.
From his pocket Stanley Hopkins drew a small paper packet. He unfolded it and disclosed a golden pince-nez, with two broken ends of black silk cord dangling from the end of it.
"Willoughby Smith had excellent sight," he added. "There can be no question that this was snatched from the face or the person of the assassin."
Sherlock Holmes took the glasses into his hand, and examined them with the utmost attention and interest.
He held them on his nose, endeavoured to read through them, went to the window and stared up the street with them, looked at them most minutely in the full light of the lamp, and finally, with a chuckle, seated himself at the table and wrote a few lines upon a sheet of paper, which he tossed across to Stanley Hopkins.
Wanted, a woman of good address, attired like a lady. She has a remarkably thick nose, with eyes which are set close upon either side of it.
She has a puckered forehead, a peering expression, and probably rounded shoulders. There are indications that she has had recourse to an optician at least twice during the last few months.
As her glasses are of remarkable strength, and as opticians are not very numerous, there should be no difficulty in tracing her.
Holmes smiled at the astonishment of Hopkins, which must have been reflected upon my features. "Surely my deductions are simplicity itself," said he.
It would be difficult to name any articles which afford a finer field for inference than a pair of glasses, especially so remarkable a pair as these.
That they belong to a woman I infer from their delicacy, and also, of course, from the last words of the dying man.
You will find that the clips are too wide for your nose, showing that the lady's nose was very broad at the base.
This sort of nose is usually a short and coarse one, but there is a sufficient number of exceptions to prevent me from being dogmatic or from insisting upon this point in my description.
My own face is a narrow one, and yet I find that I cannot get my eyes into the centre, nor near the centre, of these glasses.
Therefore, the lady's eyes are set very near to the sides of the nose. You will perceive, Watson, that the glasses are concave and of unusual strength.
A lady whose vision has been so extremely contracted all her life is sure to have the physical characteristics of such vision, which are seen in the forehead, the eyelids, and the shoulders.
"Yes," I said, "I can follow each of your arguments. I confess, however, that I am unable to understand how you arrive at the double visit to the optician."
"You will perceive," he said, "that the clips are lined with tiny bands of cork to soften the pressure upon the nose.
One of these is discoloured and worn to some slight extent, but the other is new. Evidently one has fallen off and been replaced.
I should judge that the older of them has not been there more than a few months. They exactly correspond, so I gather that the lady went back to the same establishment for the second.
"By George, it's marvellous!" cried Hopkins, in an ecstasy of admiration. "To think that I had all that evidence in my hand and never knew it!
Nothing, Mr. Holmes. I think that you know as much as I do now-probably more. We have had inquiries made as to any stranger seen on the country roads or at the railway station.
We have heard of none. What beats me is the utter want of all object in the crime. Not a ghost of a motive can anyone suggest.
If it is not asking too much, Mr. Holmes. There's a train from Charing Cross to Chatham at six in the morning, and we should be at Yoxley Old Place between eight and nine.
Then we shall take it. Your case has certainly some features of great interest, and I shall be delighted to look into it.
Well, it's nearly one, and we had best get a few hours' sleep. I daresay you can manage all right on the sofa in front of the fire.
The gale had blown itself out next day, but it was a bitter morning when we started upon our journey.
Well, it's only a reasonable walk to Chatham. Anyone might stay there or take a train without being observed.
This is the garden path of which I spoke, Mr. Holmes. I'll pledge my word there was no mark on it yesterday.
This side, sir. This narrow margin of grass between the path and the flower-bed. I can't see the traces now, but they were clear to me then.
"Yes, yes: someone has passed along," said Holmes, stooping over the grass border. "Our lady must have picked her steps carefully, must she not, since on the one side she would leave a track on the path, and on the other an even clearer one on the soft bed?"
Hum! It was a very remarkable performance-very remarkable. Well, I think we have exhausted the path. Let us go farther.
This garden door is usually kept open, I suppose? Then this visitor had nothing to do but to walk in.
The idea of murder was not in her mind, or she would have provided herself with some sort of weapon, instead of having to pick this knife off the writing-table.
She advanced along this corridor, leaving no traces upon the cocoanut matting. Then she found herself in this study.
Not more than a few minutes, sir. I forgot to tell you that Mrs. Marker, the housekeeper, had been in there tidying not very long before-about a quarter of an hour, she says.
Well, that gives us a limit. Our lady enters this room, and what does she do? She goes over to the writing-table.
What for? Not for anything in the drawers. If there had been anything worth her taking, it would surely have been locked up.
No, it was for something in that wooden bureau. Halloa! what is that scratch upon the face of it? Just hold a match, Watson.
The mark which he was examining began upon the brass-work on the right-hand side of the keyhole, and extended for about four inches, where it had scratched the varnish from the surface.
This is recent, quite recent. See how the brass shines where it is cut. An old scratch would be the same colour as the surface.
Look at it through my lens. There's the varnish, too, like earth on each side of a furrow. Is Mrs. Marker there?
I am sure you did not, for a duster would have swept away these shreds of varnish. Who has the key of this bureau?
Very good. Mrs. Marker, you can go. Now we are making a little progress. Our lady enters the room, advances to the bureau, and either opens it or tries to do so.
While she is thus engaged, young Willoughby Smith enters the room. In her hurry to withdraw the key, she makes this scratch upon the door.
He seizes her, and she, snatching up the nearest object, which happens to be this knife, strikes at him in order to make him let go his hold.
The blow is a fatal one. He falls and she escapes, either with or without the object for which she has come.
Is Susan, the maid, there? Could anyone have got away through that door after the time that you heard the cry, Susan?
No, sir, it is impossible. Before I got down the stair, I'd have seen anyone in the passage. Besides, the door never opened, or I would have heard it.
That settles this exit. Then no doubt the lady went out the way she came. I understand that this other passage leads only to the professor's room.
We shall go down it and make the acquaintance of the professor. Halloa, Hopkins! this is very important, very important indeed.
Don't you see any bearing upon the case? Well, well. I don't insist upon it. No doubt I am wrong. And yet it seems to me to be suggestive.
We passed down the passage, which was of the same length as that which led to the garden. At the end was a short flight of steps ending in a door.
It was a very large chamber, lined with innumerable volumes, which had overflowed from the shelves and lay in piles in the corners, or were stacked all round at the base of the cases.
The bed was in the centre of the room, and in it, propped up with pillows, was the owner of the house.
I have seldom seen a more remarkable-looking person. It was a gaunt, aquiline face which was turned towards us, with piercing dark eyes, which lurked in deep hollows under overhung and tufted brows.
His hair and beard were white, save that the latter was curiously stained with yellow around his mouth.
A cigarette glowed amid the tangle of white hair, and the air of the room was fetid with stale tobacco smoke.
"A smoker, Mr. Holmes?" said he, speaking in well-chosen English, with a curious little mincing accent.
Pray take a cigarette. And you, sir? I can recommend them, for I have them especially prepared by Ionides, of Alexandria.
He sends me a thousand at a time, and I grieve to say that I have to arrange for a fresh supply every fortnight.
Bad, sir, very bad, but an old man has few pleasures. Tobacco and my work-that is all that is left to me.
"Tobacco and my work, but now only tobacco," the old man exclaimed. "Alas! what a fatal interruption!
Who could have foreseen such a terrible catastrophe? So estimable a young man! I assure you that, after a few months' training, he was an admirable assistant.
I shall indeed be indebted to you if you can throw a light where all is so dark to us. To a poor bookworm and invalid like myself such a blow is paralysing.
I seem to have lost the faculty of thought. But you are a man of action-you are a man of affairs. It is part of the everyday routine of your life.
You can preserve your balance in every emergency. We are fortunate, indeed, in having you at our side.
Holmes was pacing up and down one side of the room whilst the old professor was talking. I observed that he was smoking with extraordinary rapidity.
"Yes, sir, it is a crushing blow," said the old man. "That is my _magnum opus_-the pile of papers on the side table yonder.
It is my analysis of the documents found in the Coptic monasteries of Syria and Egypt, a work which will cut deep at the very foundation of revealed religion.
With my enfeebled health I do not know whether I shall ever be able to complete it, now that my assistant has been taken from me.
"I am a connoisseur," said he, taking another cigarette from the box-his fourth-and lighting it from the stub of that which he had finished.
I will not trouble you with any lengthy cross-examination, Professor Coram, since I gather that you were in bed at the time of the crime, and could know nothing about it.
I would only ask this: What do you imagine that this poor fellow meant by his last words: 'The professor-it was she'?
"Susan is a country girl," said he, "and you know the incredible stupidity of that class. I fancy that the poor fellow murmured some incoherent delirious words, and that she twisted them into this meaningless message."
Possibly an accident, possibly-I only breathe it among ourselves-a suicide. Young men have their hidden troubles-some affair of the heart, perhaps, which we have never known.
Ah! I am only a student-a man of dreams. I cannot explain the practical things of life. But still, we are aware, my friend, that love-gages may take strange shapes.
This gentleman speaks of footsteps in the grass, but, after all, it is easy to be mistaken on such a point.
As to the knife, it might well be thrown far from the unfortunate man as he fell. It is possible that I speak as a child, but to me it seems that Willoughby Smith has met his fate by his own hand.
Holmes seemed struck by the theory thus put forward, and he continued to walk up and down for some time, lost in thought and consuming cigarette after cigarette.
Nothing that would help a thief. Family papers, letters from my poor wife, diplomas of universities which have done me honour.
"No, I hardly think that it would help me," said he. "I should prefer to go quietly down to your garden, and turn the whole matter over in my head.
At two o'clock we will come again, and report to you anything which may have happened in the interval.
"It depends upon those cigarettes that I smoked," said he. "It is possible that I am utterly mistaken.
Well, well, you may see for yourself. If not, there's no harm done. Of course, we always have the optician clue to fall back upon, but I take a short cut when I can get it.
I may have remarked before that Holmes had, when he liked, a peculiarly ingratiating way with women, and that he very readily established terms of confidence with them.
In half the time which he had named, he had captured the housekeeper's goodwill and was chatting with her as if he had known her for years.
Yes, Mr. Holmes, it is as you say, sir. He does smoke something terrible. All day and sometimes all night, sir.
I've seen that room of a morning-well, sir, you'd have thought it was a London fog. Poor young Mr. Smith, he was a smoker also, but not as bad as the professor.
I'll wager he took no breakfast this morning, and won't face his lunch after all the cigarettes I saw him consume.
I'm surprised myself, for since I came into that room yesterday and saw young Mr. Smith lying there on the floor, I couldn't bear to look at food.
As to my friend, all his usual energy seemed to have deserted him. I had never known him handle a case in such a half-hearted fashion.
I could not myself see the bearing of this incident, but I clearly perceived that Holmes was weaving it into the general scheme which he had formed in his brain.
Suddenly he sprang from his chair and glanced at his watch. "Two o'clock, gentlemen," said he. "We must go up and have it out with our friend, the professor."
The old man had just finished his lunch, and certainly his empty dish bore evidence to the good appetite with which his housekeeper had credited him.
He was, indeed, a weird figure as he turned his white mane and his glowing eyes towards us. The eternal cigarette smouldered in his mouth.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, have you solved this mystery yet?" He shoved the large tin of cigarettes which stood on a table beside him towards my companion.
Holmes stretched out his hand at the same moment, and between them they tipped the box over the edge.
For a minute or two we were all on our knees retrieving stray cigarettes from impossible places. When we rose again, I observed Holmes's eyes were shining and his cheeks tinged with colour.
Stanley Hopkins and I stared in amazement. Something like a sneer quivered over the gaunt features of the old professor.
You are surely joking, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You compel me to tell you that this is too serious a matter to be treated in such a fashion.
A lady yesterday entered your study. She came with the intention of possessing herself of certain documents which were in your bureau.
She had a key of her own. I have had an opportunity of examining yours, and I do not find that slight discolouration which the scratch made upon the varnish would have produced.
You were not an accessory, therefore, and she came, so far as I can read the evidence, without your knowledge to rob you.
The professor blew a cloud from his lips. "This is most interesting and instructive," said he. "Have you no more to add?
I will endeavour to do so. In the first place she was seized by your secretary, and stabbed him in order to escape.
This catastrophe I am inclined to regard as an unhappy accident, for I am convinced that the lady had no intention of inflicting so grievous an injury.
An assassin does not come unarmed. Horrified by what she had done, she rushed wildly away from the scene of the tragedy.
Unfortunately for her, she had lost her glasses in the scuffle, and as she was extremely short-sighted she was really helpless without them.
What was she to do? She could not go back. She could not remain where she was. She must go on. She went on.
The old man sat with his mouth open, staring wildly at Holmes. Amazement and fear were stamped upon his expressive features.
"All very fine, Mr. Holmes," said he. "But there is one little flaw in your splendid theory. I was myself in my room, and I never left it during the day."
And you mean to say that I could lie upon that bed and not be aware that a woman had entered my room?
I never said so. You were aware of it. You spoke with her. You recognized her. You aided her to escape.
Again the professor burst into high-keyed laughter. He had risen to his feet, and his eyes glowed like embers.
I saw the old man throw up his arms, a terrible convulsion passed over his grim face, and he fell back in his chair.
At the same instant the bookcase at which Holmes pointed swung round upon a hinge, and a woman rushed out into the room.
She was brown with the dust and draped with the cobwebs which had come from the walls of her hiding-place.
What with her natural blindness, and what with the change from dark to light, she stood as one dazed, blinking about her to see where and who we were.
And yet, in spite of all these disadvantages, there was a certain nobility in the woman's bearing-a gallantry in the defiant chin and in the upraised head, which compelled something of respect and admiration.
Stanley Hopkins had laid his hand upon her arm and claimed her as his prisoner, but she waved him aside gently, and yet with an over-mastering dignity which compelled obedience.
"Yes, sir, I am your prisoner," she said. "From where I stood I could hear everything, and I know that you have learned the truth.
I confess it all. It was I who killed the young man. But you are right-you who say it was an accident.
I did not even know that it was a knife which I held in my hand, for in my despair I snatched anything from the table and struck at him to make him let me go.
She had turned a dreadful colour, the more ghastly under the dark dust-streaks upon her face. She seated herself on the side of the bed; then she resumed.
"I have only a little time here," she said, "but I would have you to know the whole truth. I am this man's wife.
I have said, gentlemen, that I am this man's wife. He was fifty and I a foolish girl of twenty when we married.
Yes, we were all arrested upon his confession. Some of us found our way to the gallows, and some to Siberia.
I was among these last, but my term was not for life. My husband came to England with his ill-gotten gains and has lived in quiet ever since, knowing well that if the Brotherhood knew where he was not a week would pass before justice would be done.
The old man reached out a trembling hand and helped himself to a cigarette. "I am in your hands, Anna," said he.
"I have not yet told you the height of his villainy," said she. "Among our comrades of the Order, there was one who was the friend of my heart.
He was noble, unselfish, loving-all that my husband was not. He hated violence. We were all guilty-if that is guilt-but he was not.
My husband found and kept both diary and letters. He hid them, and he tried hard to swear away the young man's life.
In this he failed, but Alexis was sent a convict to Siberia, where now, at this moment, he works in a salt mine.
Think of that, you villain, you villain!-now, now, at this very moment, Alexis, a man whose name you are not worthy to speak, works and lives like a slave, and yet I have your life in my hands, and I let you go.
I had just taken the paper; and was locking the cupboard, when the young man seized me. I had seen him already that morning.
He had met me on the road, and I had asked him to tell me where Professor Coram lived, not knowing that he was in his employ.
"Exactly! Exactly!" said Holmes. "The secretary came back, and told his employer of the woman he had met.
Then, in his last breath, he tried to send a message that it was she-the she whom he had just discussed with him.
"You must let me speak," said the woman, in an imperative voice, and her face contracted as if in pain.
When he had fallen I rushed from the room, chose the wrong door, and found myself in my husband's room.
He spoke of giving me up. I showed him that if he did so, his life was in my hands. If he gave me to the law, I could give him to the Brotherhood.
It was not that I wished to live for my own sake, but it was that I desired to accomplish my purpose.
He knew that I would do what I said-that his own fate was involved in mine. For that reason, and for no other, he shielded me.
He thrust me into that dark hiding-place-a relic of old days, known only to himself. He took his meals in his own room, and so was able to give me part of his food.
It was agreed that when the police left the house I should slip away by night and come back no more. But in some way you have read our plans.
She tore from the bosom of her dress a small packet. "These are my last words," said she; "here is the packet which will save Alexis.
I confide it to your honour and to your love of justice. Take it! You will deliver it at the Russian Embassy.
"Stop her!" cried Holmes. He had bounded across the room and had wrenched a small phial from her hand.
"Too late!" she said, sinking back on the bed. "Too late! I took the poison before I left my hiding-place.
"A simple case, and yet, in some ways, an instructive one," Holmes remarked, as we travelled back to town.
It hinged from the outset upon the pince-nez. But for the fortunate chance of the dying man having seized these, I am not sure that we could ever have reached our solution.
It was clear to me, from the strength of the glasses, that the wearer must have been very blind and helpless when deprived of them.
When you asked me to believe that she walked along a narrow strip of grass without once making a false step, I remarked, as you may remember, that it was a noteworthy performance.
In my mind I set it down as an impossible performance, save in the unlikely case that she had a second pair of glasses.
I was forced, therefore, to consider seriously the hypothesis that she had remained within the house.
I was keenly on the alert, therefore, for whatever would bear out this supposition, and I examined the room narrowly for anything in the shape of a hiding-place.
The carpet seemed continuous and firmly nailed, so I dismissed the idea of a trap-door. There might well be a recess behind the books.
As you are aware, such devices are common in old libraries. I observed that books were piled on the floor at all other points, but that one bookcase was left clear.
This, then, might be the door. I could see no marks to guide me, but the carpet was of a dun colour, which lends itself very well to examination.
I therefore smoked a great number of those excellent cigarettes, and I dropped the ash all over the space in front of the suspected bookcase.
Well, Hopkins, here we are at Charing Cross, and I congratulate you on having brought your case to a successful conclusion.
You are going to headquarters, no doubt. I think, Watson, you and I will drive together to the Russian Embassy.
Please await me. Terrible misfortune. Right wing three-quarter missing, indispensable to-morrow. OVERTON.
"Strand postmark, and dispatched ten thirty-six," said Holmes, reading it over and over. "Mr. Overton was evidently considerably excited when he sent it, and somewhat incoherent in consequence.
Well, well, he will be here, I daresay, by the time I have looked through _The Times_, and then we shall know all about it.
For years I had gradually weaned him from that drug mania which had threatened once to check his remarkable career.
Therefore I blessed this Mr. Overton whoever he might be, since he had come with his enigmatic message to break that dangerous calm which brought more peril to my friend than all the storms of his tempestuous life.
As we had expected, the telegram was soon followed by its sender, and the card of Mr. Cyril Overton, Trinity College, Cambridge, announced the arrival of an enormous young man, sixteen stone of solid bone and muscle, who spanned the doorway with his broad shoulders, and looked from one of us to the other with a comely face which was haggard with anxiety.
I've been down to Scotland Yard, Mr. Holmes. I saw Inspector Stanley Hopkins. He advised me to come to you.
It's awful, Mr. Holmes-simply awful! I wonder my hair isn't grey. Godfrey Staunton-you've heard of him, of course?
He's simply the hinge that the whole team turns on. I'd rather spare two from the pack, and have Godfrey for my three-quarter line.
Whether it's passing, or tackling, or dribbling, there's no one to touch him, and then, he's got the head, and can hold us all together.
He's a fine place-kick, it's true, but then he has no judgment, and he can't sprint for nuts. Why, Morton or Johnson, the Oxford fliers, could romp round him.
Stevenson is fast enough, but he couldn't drop from the twenty-five line, and a three-quarter who can't either punt or drop isn't worth a place for pace alone.
When our visitor was silent Holmes stretched out his hand and took down letter "S" of his commonplace book.
"There is Arthur H. Staunton, the rising young forger," said he, "and there was Henry Staunton, whom I helped to hang, but Godfrey Staunton is a new name to me."
"Why, Mr. Holmes, I thought you knew things," said he. "I suppose, then, if you have never heard of Godfrey Staunton, you don't know Cyril Overton either?"
"Great Scott!" cried the athlete. "Why, I was first reserve for England against Wales, and I've skippered the 'Varsity all this year.
But that's nothing! I didn't think there was a soul in England who didn't know Godfrey Staunton, the crack three-quarter, Cambridge, Blackheath, and five Internationals.
However, your unexpected visit this morning shows me that even in that world of fresh air and fair play, there may be work for me to do.
So now, my good sir, I beg you to sit down and to tell me, slowly and quietly, exactly what it is that has occurred, and how you desire that I should help you.
Young Overton's face assumed the bothered look of the man who is more accustomed to using his muscles than his wits, but by degrees, with many repetitions and obscurities which I may omit from his narrative, he laid his strange story before us.
It's this way, Mr. Holmes. As I have said, I am the skipper of the Rugger team of Cambridge 'Varsity, and Godfrey Staunton is my best man.
I had a word or two with Godfrey before he turned in. He seemed to me to be pale and bothered. I asked him what was the matter.
He said he was all right-just a touch of headache. I bade him good-night and left him. Half an hour later, the porter tells me that a rough-looking man with a beard called with a note for Godfrey.
He had not gone to bed, and the note was taken to his room. Godfrey read it, and fell back in a chair as if he had been pole-axed.
The porter was so scared that he was going to fetch me, but Godfrey stopped him, had a drink of water, and pulled himself together.
Then he went downstairs, said a few words to the man who was waiting in the hall, and the two of them went off together.
The last that the porter saw of them, they were almost running down the street in the direction of the Strand.
This morning Godfrey's room was empty, his bed had never been slept in, and his things were all just as I had seen them the night before.
He had gone off at a moment's notice with this stranger, and no word has come from him since. I don't believe he will ever come back.
He was a sportsman, was Godfrey, down to his marrow, and he wouldn't have stopped his training and let in his skipper if it were not for some cause that was too strong for him.
I wired to Cambridge to learn if anything had been heard of him there. I have had an answer. No one has seen him.
Indeed. This throws new light upon the matter. Lord Mount-James is one of the richest men in England.
Yes, he was his heir, and the old boy is nearly eighty-cram full of gout, too. They say he could chalk his billiard-cue with his knuckles.
He never allowed Godfrey a shilling in his life, for he is an absolute miser, but it will all come to him right enough.
Well, we can soon determine that. If your friend was going to his relative, Lord Mount-James, you have then to explain the visit of this rough-looking fellow at so late an hour, and the agitation that was caused by his coming.
It must, as you say, have been an overpowering necessity which tore him away in such a fashion, and the same necessity is likely to hold him away.
Let us step round together to the hotel, and see if the porter can throw any fresh light upon the matter.
He seemed himself to be agitated. The porter had observed his hand trembling when he had held out the note.
Godfrey Staunton had crammed the note into his pocket. Staunton had not shaken hands with the man in the hall.
They had exchanged a few sentences, of which the porter had only distinguished the one word "time." Then they had hurried off in the manner described.
Yes, sir. I was standing by the door, and he with his back turned at that table. When he had written it, he said: 'All right, porter, I will take this myself.'
Holmes rose. Taking the forms, he carried them over to the window and carefully examined that which was uppermost.
"It is a pity he did not write in pencil," said he, throwing them down again with a shrug of disappointment.
As you have no doubt frequently observed, Watson, the impression usually goes through-a fact which has dissolved many a happy marriage.
However, I can find no trace here. I rejoice, however, to perceive that he wrote with a broad-pointed quill pen, and I can hardly doubt that we will find some impression upon this blotting-pad.
"That is unnecessary," said Holmes. "The paper is thin, and the reverse will give the message. Here it is."
So that is the tail end of the telegram which Godfrey Staunton dispatched within a few hours of his disappearance.
There are at least six words of the message which have escaped us; but what remains-'Stand by us for God's sake!
'-proves that this young man saw a formidable danger which approached him, and from which someone else could protect him.
'_Us_,' mark you! Another person was involved. Who should it be but the pale-faced, bearded man, who seemed himself in so nervous a state?
What, then, is the connection between Godfrey Staunton and the bearded man? And what is the third source from which each of them sought for help against pressing danger?
There is so much red tape in these matters. However, I have no doubt that with a little delicacy and finesse the end may be attained.
Meanwhile, I should like in your presence, Mr. Overton, to go through these papers which have been left upon the table.
There were a number of letters, bills, and notebooks, which Holmes turned over and examined with quick, nervous fingers and darting, penetrating eyes.
"Nothing here," he said, at last. "By the way, I suppose your friend was a healthy young fellow-nothing amiss with him?"
Perhaps he was not so strong as you suppose. I should think he may have had some secret trouble. With your assent, I will put one or two of these papers in my pocket, in case they should bear upon our future inquiry.
"One moment-one moment!" cried a querulous voice, and we looked up to find a queer little old man, jerking and twitching in the doorway.
He was dressed in rusty black, with a very broad-brimmed top-hat and a loose white necktie-the whole effect being that of a very rustic parson or of an undertaker's mute.
Yet, in spite of his shabby and even absurd appearance, his voice had a sharp crackle, and his manner a quick intensity which commanded attention.
Then it is you who sent me a telegram. My name is Lord Mount-James. I came round as quickly as the Bayswater bus would bring me.
"Nothing of the sort, sir!" screamed the little man. "Don't look to me for a penny-not a penny! You understand that, Mr. Detective!
As to those papers with which you are making so free, I may tell you that in case there should be anything of any value among them, you will be held strictly to account for what you do with them.
"Very good, sir," said Sherlock Holmes. "May I ask, in the meanwhile, whether you have yourself any theory to account for this young man's disappearance?"
No, sir, I have not. He is big enough and old enough to look after himself, and if he is so foolish as to lose himself, I entirely refuse to accept the responsibility of hunting for him.
"I quite understand your position," said Holmes, with a mischievous twinkle in his eyes. "Perhaps you don't quite understand mine.
Godfrey Staunton appears to have been a poor man. If he has been kidnapped, it could not have been for anything which he himself possesses.
The fame of your wealth has gone abroad, Lord Mount-James, and it is entirely possible that a gang of thieves have secured your nephew in order to gain from him some information as to your house, your habits, and your treasure.
Heavens, sir, what an idea! I never thought of such villainy! What inhuman rogues there are in the world!
But Godfrey is a fine lad-a staunch lad. Nothing would induce him to give his old uncle away. I'll have the plate moved over to the bank this evening.
In the meantime spare no pains, Mr. Detective! I beg you to leave no stone unturned to bring him safely back.
Even in his chastened frame of mind, the noble miser could give us no information which could help us, for he knew little of the private life of his nephew.
Our only clue lay in the truncated telegram, and with a copy of this in his hand Holmes set forth to find a second link for his chain.
We had shaken off Lord Mount-James, and Overton had gone to consult with the other members of his team over the misfortune which had befallen them.
"It's worth trying, Watson," said Holmes. "Of course, with a warrant we could demand to see the counterfoils, but we have not reached that stage yet.
"I am sorry to trouble you," said he, in his blandest manner, to the young woman behind the grating; "there is some small mistake about a telegram I sent yesterday.
I have had no answer, and I very much fear that I must have omitted to put my name at the end. Could you tell me if this was so?
Holmes put his finger to his lips and glanced at me. "The last words in it were 'For God's sake,'" he whispered, confidentially; "I am very anxious at getting no answer."
"Then that, of course, accounts for my getting no answer," said Holmes. "Dear me, how very stupid of me, to be sure!
Good-morning, miss, and many thanks for having relieved my mind." He chuckled and rubbed his hands when we found ourselves in the street once more.
We progress, my dear Watson, we progress. I had seven different schemes for getting a glimpse of that telegram, but I could hardly hope to succeed the very first time.
Yes, I think we must run down to Cambridge together. All the indications seem to me to point in that direction.
"Tell me," I asked, as we rattled up Gray's Inn Road, "have you any suspicion yet as to the cause of the disappearance?
I don't think that among all our cases I have known one where the motives are more obscure. Surely you don't really imagine that he may be kidnapped in order to give information against his wealthy uncle?
I confess, my dear Watson, that that does not appeal to me as a very probable explanation. It struck me, however, as being the one which was most likely to interest that exceedingly unpleasant old person.
There is one explanation. A second very obvious one is that this young man really is the heir of a great property, however modest his means may at present be, and it is not impossible that a plot to hold him for ransom might be concocted.
Quite true, Watson. The telegram still remains the only solid thing with which we have to deal, and we must not permit our attention to wander away from it.
It is to gain light upon the purpose of this telegram that we are now upon our way to Cambridge. The path of our investigation is at present obscure, but I shall be very much surprised if before evening we have not cleared it up, or made a considerable advance along it.
It was already dark when we reached the old university city. Holmes took a cab at the station and ordered the man to drive to the house of Dr. Leslie Armstrong.
A few minutes later, we had stopped at a large mansion in the busiest thoroughfare. We were shown in, and after a long wait were at last admitted into the consulting-room, where we found the doctor seated behind his table.
It argues the degree in which I had lost touch with my profession that the name of Leslie Armstrong was unknown to me.
Now I am aware that he is not only one of the heads of the medical school of the university, but a thinker of European reputation in more than one branch of science.
A man of deep character, a man with an alert mind, grim, ascetic, self-contained, formidable-so I read Dr. Leslie Armstrong.
He held my friend's card in his hand, and he looked up with no very pleased expression upon his dour features.
I have heard your name, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and I am aware of your profession-one of which I by no means approve.
"In that, Doctor, you will find yourself in agreement with every criminal in the country," said my friend, quietly.
You may look upon me simply as an irregular pioneer, who goes in front of the regular forces of the country.
I have no sympathy with these childish games. The young man's fate interests me deeply, since I know him and like him.
Holmes replaced the bill in his notebook. "If you prefer a public explanation, it must come sooner or later," said he.
I have already told you that I can hush up that which others will be bound to publish, and you would really be wiser to take me into your complete confidence.
"I'll trouble you to walk out of my house, sir," said he. "You can tell your employer, Lord Mount-James, that I do not wish to have anything to do either with him or with his agents.
No, sir-not another word!" He rang the bell furiously. "John, show these gentlemen out!" A pompous butler ushered us severely to the door, and we found ourselves in the street.
And now, my poor Watson, here we are, stranded and friendless in this inhospitable town, which we cannot leave without abandoning our case.
This little inn just opposite Armstrong's house is singularly adapted to our needs. If you would engage a front room and purchase the necessaries for the night, I may have time to make a few inquiries.
These few inquiries proved, however, to be a more lengthy proceeding than Holmes had imagined, for he did not return to the inn until nearly nine o'clock.
The sound of carriage wheels caused him to rise and glance out of the window. A brougham and pair of greys, under the glare of a gas-lamp, stood before the doctor's door.
"It's been out three hours," said Holmes; "started at half-past six, and here it is back again. That gives a radius of ten or twelve miles, and he does it once, or sometimes twice, a day."
But Armstrong is not really a doctor in practice. He is a lecturer and a consultant, but he does not care for general practice, which distracts him from his literary work.
Why, then, does he make these long journeys, which must be exceedingly irksome to him, and who is it that he visits?
Neither dog nor man liked the look of my stick, however, and the matter fell through. Relations were strained after that, and further inquiries out of the question.
All that I have learned I got from a friendly native in the yard of our own inn. It was he who told me of the doctor's habits and of his daily journey.
Excellent, Watson! You are scintillating this evening. The idea did cross my mind. There is, as you may have observed, a bicycle shop next to our inn.
Into this I rushed, engaged a bicycle, and was able to get started before the carriage was quite out of sight.
I rapidly overtook it, and then, keeping at a discreet distance of a hundred yards or so, I followed its lights until we were clear of the town.
There was no sign of it, however, and so it became evident that it had turned down one of several side roads which I had observed.
I rode back, but again saw nothing of the carriage, and now, as you perceive, it has returned after me.
Of course, I had at the outset no particular reason to connect these journeys with the disappearance of Godfrey Staunton, and was only inclined to investigate them on the general grounds that everything which concerns Dr. Armstrong is at present of interest to us, but, now that I find he keeps so keen a look-out upon anyone who may follow him on these excursions, the affair appears more important, and I shall not be satisfied until I have made the matter clear.
Can we? It is not so easy as you seem to think. You are not familiar with Cambridgeshire scenery, are you?
He knows where the young man is-to that I'll swear, and if he knows, then it must be our own fault if we cannot manage to know also.
At present it must be admitted that the odd trick is in his possession, and, as you are aware, Watson, it is not my habit to leave the game in that condition.
And yet the next day brought us no nearer to the solution of the mystery. A note was handed in after breakfast, which Holmes passed across to me with a smile.
"An outspoken, honest antagonist is the doctor," said Holmes. "Well, well, he excites my curiosity, and I must really know before I leave him."
"His carriage is at his door now," said I. "There he is stepping into it. I saw him glance up at our window as he did so.
No, no, my dear Watson! With all respect for your natural acumen, I do not think that you are quite a match for the worthy doctor.
No doubt you will find some sights to amuse you in this venerable city, and I hope to bring back a more favourable report to you before evening.
Once more, however, my friend was destined to be disappointed. He came back at night weary and unsuccessful.
I have covered some ground. Chesterton, Histon, Waterbeach, and Oakington have each been explored, and have each proved disappointing.
The daily appearance of a brougham and pair could hardly have been overlooked in such Sleepy Hollows.
Oh, it is clear enough. It is from our friend Overton, and is in answer to a question from me. I'll just send round a note to Mr. Jeremy Dixon, and then I have no doubt that our luck will turn.
'The defeat of the Light Blues may be entirely attributed to the unfortunate absence of the crack International, Godfrey Staunton, whose want was felt at every instant of the game.
The lack of combination in the three-quarter line and their weakness both in attack and defence more than neutralized the efforts of a heavy and hard-working pack.'
"Then our friend Overton's forebodings have been justified," said Holmes. "Personally I am in agreement with Dr. Armstrong, and football does not come within my horizon.
I was horrified by my first glimpse of Holmes next morning, for he sat by the fire holding his tiny hypodermic syringe.
I associated that instrument with the single weakness of his nature, and I feared the worst when I saw it glittering in his hand.
No, no, my dear fellow, there is no cause for alarm. It is not upon this occasion the instrument of evil, but it will rather prove to be the key which will unlock our mystery.
On this syringe I base all my hopes. I have just returned from a small scouting expedition, and everything is favourable.
Eat a good breakfast, Watson, for I propose to get upon Dr. Armstrong's trail to-day, and once on it I will not stop for rest or food until I run him to his burrow.
"In that case," said I, "we had best carry our breakfast with us, for he is making an early start. His carriage is at the door."
Never mind. Let him go. He will be clever if he can drive where I cannot follow him. When you have finished, come downstairs with me, and I will introduce you to a detective who is a very eminent specialist in the work that lies before us.
When we descended I followed Holmes into the stable yard, where he opened the door of a loose-box and led out a squat, lop-eared, white-and-tan dog, something between a beagle and a foxhound.
"Let me introduce you to Pompey," said he. "Pompey is the pride of the local draghounds-no very great flier, as his build will show, but a staunch hound on a scent.
Well, Pompey, you may not be fast, but I expect you will be too fast for a couple of middle-aged London gentlemen, so I will take the liberty of fastening this leather leash to your collar.
A threadbare and venerable device, but useful upon occasion. I walked into the doctor's yard this morning, and shot my syringe full of aniseed over the hind wheel.
A draghound will follow aniseed from here to John o'Groat's, and our friend, Armstrong, would have to drive through the Cam before he would shake Pompey off his trail.
The road took a sweep to the south of the town, and continued in the opposite direction to that in which we started.
The doctor has certainly played the game for all it is worth, and one would like to know the reason for such elaborate deception.
This should be the village of Trumpington to the right of us. And, by Jove! here is the brougham coming round the corner.
He sprang through a gate into a field, dragging the reluctant Pompey after him. We had hardly got under the shelter of the hedge when the carriage rattled past.
I caught a glimpse of Dr. Armstrong within, his shoulders bowed, his head sunk on his hands, the very image of distress.
"I fear there is some dark ending to our quest," said he. "It cannot be long before we know it. Come, Pompey!
There could be no doubt that we had reached the end of our journey. Pompey ran about and whined eagerly outside the gate, where the marks of the brougham's wheels were still to be seen.
A footpath led across to the lonely cottage. Holmes tied the dog to the hedge, and we hastened onward.
Holmes paused irresolute, and then he glanced back at the road which he had just traversed. A brougham was coming down it, and there could be no mistaking those grey horses.
"By Jove, the doctor is coming back!" cried Holmes. "That settles it. We are bound to see what it means before he comes."
He opened the door, and we stepped into the hall. The droning sound swelled louder upon our ears until it became one long, deep wail of distress.
It came from upstairs. Holmes darted up, and I followed him. He pushed open a half-closed door, and we both stood appalled at the sight before us.
A woman, young and beautiful, was lying dead upon the bed. Her calm pale face, with dim, wide-opened blue eyes, looked upward from amid a great tangle of golden hair.
At the foot of the bed, half sitting, half kneeling, his face buried in the clothes, was a young man, whose frame was racked by his sobs.
So absorbed was he by his bitter grief, that he never looked up until Holmes's hand was on his shoulder.
The man was so dazed that he could not be made to understand that we were anything but doctors who had been sent to his assistance.
Holmes was endeavouring to utter a few words of consolation and to explain the alarm which had been caused to his friends by his sudden disappearance when there was a step upon the stairs, and there was the heavy, stern, questioning face of Dr. Armstrong at the door.
"So, gentlemen," said he, "you have attained your end and have certainly chosen a particularly delicate moment for your intrusion.
I would not brawl in the presence of death, but I can assure you that if I were a younger man your monstrous conduct would not pass with impunity.
"Excuse me, Dr. Armstrong, I think we are a little at cross-purposes," said my friend, with dignity. "If you could step downstairs with us, we may each be able to give some light to the other upon this miserable affair."
I wish you to understand, in the first place, that I am not employed by Lord Mount-James, and that my sympathies in this matter are entirely against that nobleman.
If, as I imagine, there is no breach of the law in this matter, you can absolutely depend upon my discretion and my cooperation in keeping the facts out of the papers.
She was as good as she was beautiful and as intelligent as she was good. No man need be ashamed of such a wife.
But Godfrey was the heir to this crabbed old nobleman, and it was quite certain that the news of his marriage would have been the end of his inheritance.
I knew the lad well, and I loved him for his many excellent qualities. I did all I could to help him to keep things straight.
We did our very best to keep the thing from everyone, for, when once such a whisper gets about, it is not long before everyone has heard it.
But at last there came a terrible blow in the shape of dangerous illness to his wife. It was consumption of the most virulent kind.
The poor boy was half crazed with grief, and yet he had to go to London to play this match, for he could not get out of it without explanations which would expose his secret.
I tried to cheer him up by wire, and he sent me one in reply, imploring me to do all I could. This was the telegram which you appear in some inexplicable way to have seen.
I did not tell him how urgent the danger was, for I knew that he could do no good here, but I sent the truth to the girl's father, and he very injudiciously communicated it to Godfrey.
The result was that he came straight away in a state bordering on frenzy, and has remained in the same state, kneeling at the end of her bed, until this morning death put an end to her sufferings.
That is all, Mr. Holmes, and I am sure that I can rely upon your discretion and that of your friend.
"Come, Watson," said he, and we passed from that house of grief into the pale sunlight of the winter day.
It was on a bitterly cold and frosty morning, towards the end of the winter of '97, that I was awakened by a tugging at my shoulder.
It was Holmes. The candle in his hand shone upon his eager, stooping face, and told me at a glance that something was amiss.
Ten minutes later we were both in a cab, and rattling through the silent streets on our way to Charing Cross Station.
The first faint winter's dawn was beginning to appear, and we could dimly see the occasional figure of an early workman as he passed us, blurred and indistinct in the opalescent London reek.
Holmes nestled in silence into his heavy coat, and I was glad to do the same, for the air was most bitter, and neither of us had broken our fast.
It was not until we had consumed some hot tea at the station and taken our places in the Kentish train that we were sufficiently thawed, he to speak and I to listen.
I should be very glad of your immediate assistance in what promises to be a most remarkable case. It is something quite in your line.
Except for releasing the lady I will see that everything is kept exactly as I have found it, but I beg you not to lose an instant, as it is difficult to leave Sir Eustace there.
"Hopkins has called me in seven times, and on each occasion his summons has been entirely justified," said Holmes.
I fancy that every one of his cases has found its way into your collection, and I must admit, Watson, that you have some power of selection, which atones for much which I deplore in your narratives.
You slur over work of the utmost finesse and delicacy, in order to dwell upon sensational details which may excite, but cannot possibly instruct, the reader.
I should say so. Hopkins's writing shows considerable agitation, and he is not an emotional man. Yes, I gather there has been violence, and that the body is left for our inspection.
A mere suicide would not have caused him to send for me. As to the release of the lady, it would appear that she has been locked in her room during the tragedy.
We are moving in high life, Watson, crackling paper, 'E.B.' monogram, coat-of-arms, picturesque address.
I think that friend Hopkins will live up to his reputation, and that we shall have an interesting morning.
By an inspection of the trains, and by reckoning the time. The local police had to be called in, they had to communicate with Scotland Yard, Hopkins had to go out, and he in turn had to send for me.
All that makes a fair night's work. Well, here we are at Chiselhurst Station, and we shall soon set our doubts at rest.
A drive of a couple of miles through narrow country lanes brought us to a park gate, which was opened for us by an old lodge-keeper, whose haggard face bore the reflection of some great disaster.
The avenue ran through a noble park, between lines of ancient elms, and ended in a low, widespread house, pillared in front after the fashion of Palladio.
The central part was evidently of a great age and shrouded in ivy, but the large windows showed that modern changes had been carried out, and one wing of the house appeared to be entirely new.
The youthful figure and alert, eager face of Inspector Stanley Hopkins confronted us in the open doorway.
Exactly; the father and two sons. It's their work. I have not a doubt of it. They did a job at Sydenham a fortnight ago and were seen and described.
Rather cool to do another so soon and so near, but it is they, beyond all doubt. It's a hanging matter this time.
Exactly-one of the richest men in Kent-Lady Brackenstall is in the morning-room. Poor lady, she has had a most dreadful experience.
She seemed half dead when I saw her first. I think you had best see her and hear her account of the facts.
Lady Brackenstall was no ordinary person. Seldom have I seen so graceful a figure, so womanly a presence, and so beautiful a face.
She was a blonde, golden-haired, blue-eyed, and would no doubt have had the perfect complexion which goes with such colouring, had not her recent experience left her drawn and haggard.
Her sufferings were physical as well as mental, for over one eye rose a hideous, plum-coloured swelling, which her maid, a tall, austere woman, was bathing assiduously with vinegar and water.
She was enveloped in a loose dressing-gown of blue and silver, but a black sequin-covered dinner-dress lay upon the couch beside her.
"I have told you all that happened, Mr. Hopkins," she said, wearily. "Could you not repeat it for me?
Well, if you think it necessary, I will tell these gentlemen what occurred. Have they been in the dining-room yet?
I shall be glad when you can arrange matters. It is horrible to me to think of him still lying there.
She shuddered and buried her face in her hands. As she did so, the loose gown fell back from her forearms.
"You have other injuries, madam! What is this?" Two vivid red spots stood out on one of the white, round limbs.
I am the wife of Sir Eustace Brackenstall. I have been married about a year. I suppose that it is no use my attempting to conceal that our marriage has not been a happy one.
I fear that all our neighbours would tell you that, even if I were to attempt to deny it. Perhaps the fault may be partly mine.
I was brought up in the freer, less conventional atmosphere of South Australia, and this English life, with its proprieties and its primness, is not congenial to me.
But the main reason lies in the one fact, which is notorious to everyone, and that is that Sir Eustace was a confirmed drunkard.
To be with such a man for an hour is unpleasant. Can you imagine what it means for a sensitive and high-spirited woman to be tied to him for day and night?
It is a sacrilege, a crime, a villainy to hold that such a marriage is binding. I say that these monstrous laws of yours will bring a curse upon the land-God will not let such wickedness endure.
For an instant she sat up, her cheeks flushed, and her eyes blazing from under the terrible mark upon her brow.
Then the strong, soothing hand of the austere maid drew her head down on to the cushion, and the wild anger died away into passionate sobbing.
Sir Eustace retired about half-past ten. The servants had already gone to their quarters. Only my maid was up, and she had remained in her room at the top of the house until I needed her services.
I sat until after eleven in this room, absorbed in a book. Then I walked round to see that all was right before I went upstairs.
It was my custom to do this myself, for, as I have explained, Sir Eustace was not always to be trusted.
I went into the kitchen, the butler's pantry, the gun-room, the billiard-room, the drawing-room, and finally the dining-room.
As I approached the window, which is covered with thick curtains, I suddenly felt the wind blow upon my face and realized that it was open.
I flung the curtain aside and found myself face to face with a broad-shouldered elderly man, who had just stepped into the room.
I stepped back, but the fellow was on me in an instant. He caught me first by the wrist and then by the throat.
I opened my mouth to scream, but he struck me a savage blow with his fist over the eye, and felled me to the ground.
I was so firmly bound that I could not move, and a handkerchief round my mouth prevented me from uttering a sound.
It was at this instant that my unfortunate husband entered the room. He had evidently heard some suspicious sounds, and he came prepared for such a scene as he found.
He fell with a groan and never moved again. I fainted once more, but again it could only have been for a very few minutes during which I was insensible.
When I opened my eyes I found that they had collected the silver from the sideboard, and they had drawn a bottle of wine which stood there.
Each of them had a glass in his hand. I have already told you, have I not, that one was elderly, with a beard, and the others young, hairless lads.
They might have been a father with his two sons. They talked together in whispers. Then they came over and made sure that I was securely bound.
Finally they withdrew, closing the window after them. It was quite a quarter of an hour before I got my mouth free.
When I did so, my screams brought the maid to my assistance. The other servants were soon alarmed, and we sent for the local police, who instantly communicated with London.
That is really all that I can tell you, gentlemen, and I trust that it will not be necessary for me to go over so painful a story again.
"I will not impose any further tax upon Lady Brackenstall's patience and time," said Holmes. "Before I go into the dining-room, I should like to hear your experience."
"I saw the men before ever they came into the house," said she. "As I sat by my bedroom window I saw three men in the moonlight down by the lodge gate yonder, but I thought nothing of it at the time.
It was more than an hour after that I heard my mistress scream, and down I ran, to find her, poor lamb, just as she says, and him on the floor, with his blood and brains over the room.
You've questioned her long enough, you gentlemen, and now she is coming to her own room, just with her old Theresa, to get the rest that she badly needs.
"She has been with her all her life," said Hopkins. "Nursed her as a baby, and came with her to England when they first left Australia, eighteen months ago.
Theresa Wright is her name, and the kind of maid you don't pick up nowadays. This way, Mr. Holmes, if you please!
The keen interest had passed out of Holmes's expressive face, and I knew that with the mystery all the charm of the case had departed.
There still remained an arrest to be effected, but what were these commonplace rogues that he should soil his hands with them?
An abstruse and learned specialist who finds that he has been called in for a case of measles would experience something of the annoyance which I read in my friend's eyes.
Yet the scene in the dining-room of the Abbey Grange was sufficiently strange to arrest his attention and to recall his waning interest.
It was a very large and high chamber, with carved oak ceiling, oaken panelling, and a fine array of deer's heads and ancient weapons around the walls.
At the further end from the door was the high French window of which we had heard. Three smaller windows on the right-hand side filled the apartment with cold winter sunshine.
On the left was a large, deep fireplace, with a massive, overhanging oak mantelpiece. Beside the fireplace was a heavy oaken chair with arms and cross-bars at the bottom.
In and out through the open woodwork was woven a crimson cord, which was secured at each side to the crosspiece below.
In releasing the lady, the cord had been slipped off her, but the knots with which it had been secured still remained.
These details only struck our attention afterwards, for our thoughts were entirely absorbed by the terrible object which lay upon the tigerskin hearthrug in front of the fire.
It was the body of a tall, well-made man, about forty years of age. He lay upon his back, his face upturned, with his white teeth grinning through his short, black beard.
He had evidently been in his bed when the alarm had broken out, for he wore a foppish, embroidered nightshirt, and his bare feet projected from his trousers.
His head was horribly injured, and the whole room bore witness to the savage ferocity of the blow which had struck him down.
Beside him lay the heavy poker, bent into a curve by the concussion. Holmes examined both it and the indescribable wreck which it had wrought.
Not the slightest. We have been on the look-out for him, and there was some idea that he had got away to America.
Now that we know that the gang are here, I don't see how they can escape. We have the news at every seaport already, and a reward will be offered before evening.
What beats me is how they could have done so mad a thing, knowing that the lady could describe them and that we could not fail to recognize the description.
That is likely enough. If she seemed to be senseless, they would not take her life. What about this poor fellow, Hopkins?
He was a good-hearted man when he was sober, but a perfect fiend when he was drunk, or rather when he was half drunk, for he seldom really went the whole way.
The devil seemed to be in him at such times, and he was capable of anything. From what I hear, in spite of all his wealth and his title, he very nearly came our way once or twice.
There was a scandal about his drenching a dog with petroleum and setting it on fire-her ladyship's dog, to make the matter worse-and that was only hushed up with difficulty.
Then he threw a decanter at that maid, Theresa Wright-there was trouble about that. On the whole, and between ourselves, it will be a brighter house without him.
Holmes was down on his knees, examining with great attention the knots upon the red cord with which the lady had been secured.
Then he carefully scrutinized the broken and frayed end where it had snapped off when the burglar had dragged it down.
How did the burglar know no one would hear it? How dared he pull at a bell-rope in that reckless fashion?
Exactly, Mr. Holmes, exactly. You put the very question which I have asked myself again and again. There can be no doubt that this fellow must have known the house and its habits.
He must have perfectly understood that the servants would all be in bed at that comparatively early hour, and that no one could possibly hear a bell ring in the kitchen.
Therefore, he must have been in close league with one of the servants. Surely that is evident. But there are eight servants, and all of good character.
"Other things being equal," said Holmes, "one would suspect the one at whose head the master threw a decanter.
The lady's story certainly seems to be corroborated, if it needed corroboration, by every detail which we see before us.
He walked to the French window and threw it open. "There are no signs here, but the ground is iron hard, and one would not expect them.
Yes, it was by their light and that of the lady's bedroom candle, that the burglars saw their way about.
Well, they did not take much-only half a dozen articles of plate off the sideboard. Lady Brackenstall thinks that they were themselves so disturbed by the death of Sir Eustace that they did not ransack the house, as they would otherwise have done.
The three glasses were grouped together, all of them tinged with wine, and one of them containing some dregs of beeswing.
The bottle stood near them, two-thirds full, and beside it lay a long, deeply stained cork. Its appearance and the dust upon the bottle showed that it was no common vintage which the murderers had enjoyed.
A change had come over Holmes's manner. He had lost his listless expression, and again I saw an alert light of interest in his keen, deep-set eyes.
Quite so. As a matter of fact, that screw was not used. This bottle was opened by a pocket screw, probably contained in a knife, and not more than an inch and a half long.
If you will examine the top of the cork, you will observe that the screw was driven in three times before the cork was extracted.
It has never been transfixed. This long screw would have transfixed it and drawn it up with a single pull.
When you catch this fellow, you will find that he has one of these multiplex knives in his possession.
But these glasses do puzzle me, I confess. Lady Brackenstall actually saw the three men drinking, did she not?
Then there is an end of it. What more is to be said? And yet, you must admit, that the three glasses are very remarkable, Hopkins.
Of course, it must be a mere chance about the glasses. Well, good-morning, Hopkins. I don't see that I can be of any use to you, and you appear to have your case very clear.
You will let me know when Randall is arrested, and any further developments which may occur. I trust that I shall soon have to congratulate you upon a successful conclusion.
During our return journey, I could see by Holmes's face that he was much puzzled by something which he had observed.
At last, by a sudden impulse, just as our train was crawling out of a suburban station, he sprang on to the platform and pulled me out after him.
Surely there are details in her story which, if we looked at in cold blood, would excite our suspicion.
As a matter of fact, burglars who have done a good stroke of business are, as a rule, only too glad to enjoy the proceeds in peace and quiet without embarking on another perilous undertaking.
Their cumulative effect is certainly considerable, and yet each of them is quite possible in itself. The most unusual thing of all, as it seems to me, is that the lady should be tied to the chair.
Well, I am not so clear about that, Watson, for it is evident that they must either kill her or else secure her in such a way that she could not give immediate notice of their escape.
But at any rate I have shown, have I not, that there is a certain element of improbability about the lady's story?
Exactly, but there was beeswing only in one glass. You must have noticed that fact. What does that suggest to your mind?
Not at all. The bottle was full of it, and it is inconceivable that the first two glasses were clear and the third heavily charged with it.
There are two possible explanations, and only two. One is that after the second glass was filled the bottle was violently agitated, and so the third glass received the beeswing.
That only two glasses were used, and that the dregs of both were poured into a third glass, so as to give the false impression that three people had been here.
In that way all the beeswing would be in the last glass, would it not? Yes, I am convinced that this is so.
Seated in a corner like an interested student who observes the demonstration of his professor, I followed every step of that remarkable research.
The window, the curtains, the carpet, the chair, the rope-each in turn was minutely examined and duly pondered.
The body of the unfortunate baronet had been removed, and all else remained as we had seen it in the morning.
Finally, to my astonishment, Holmes climbed up on to the massive mantelpiece. Far above his head hung the few inches of red cord which were still attached to the wire.
For a long time he gazed upward at it, and then in an attempt to get nearer to it he rested his knee upon a wooden bracket on the wall.
This brought his hand within a few inches of the broken end of the rope, but it was not this so much as the bracket itself which seemed to engage his attention.
"It's all right, Watson," said he. "We have got our case-one of the most remarkable in our collection.
But, dear me, how slow-witted I have been, and how nearly I have committed the blunder of my lifetime!
Man, Watson, man. Only one, but a very formidable person. Strong as a lion-witness the blow that bent that poker!
Six foot three in height, active as a squirrel, dexterous with his fingers, finally, remarkably quick-witted, for this whole ingenious story is of his concoction.
Yes, Watson, we have come upon the handiwork of a very remarkable individual. And yet, in that bell-rope, he has given us a clue which should not have left us a doubt.
Well, if you were to pull down a bell-rope, Watson, where would you expect it to break? Surely at the spot where it is attached to the wire.
Exactly. This end, which we can examine, is frayed. He was cunning enough to do that with his knife. But the other end is not frayed.
You could not observe that from here, but if you were on the mantelpiece you would see that it is cut clean off without any mark of fraying whatever.
You can reconstruct what occurred. The man needed the rope. He would not tear it down for fear of giving the alarm by ringing the bell.
What did he do? He sprang up on the mantelpiece, could not quite reach it, put his knee on the bracket-you will see the impression in the dust-and so got his knife to bear upon the cord.
I could not reach the place by at least three inches-from which I infer that he is at least three inches a bigger man than I.
Undoubtedly it is blood. This alone puts the lady's story out of court. If she were seated on the chair when the crime was done, how comes that mark?
No, no, she was placed in the chair after the death of her husband. I'll wager that the black dress shows a corresponding mark to this.
We have not yet met our Waterloo, Watson, but this is our Marengo, for it begins in defeat and ends in victory.
I should like now to have a few words with the nurse, Theresa. We must be wary for a while, if we are to get the information which we want.
Yes, sir, it is true that he threw the decanter at me. I heard him call my mistress a name, and I told him that he would not dare to speak so if her brother had been there.
Then it was that he threw it at me. He might have thrown a dozen if he had but left my bonny bird alone.
He was forever ill-treating her, and she too proud to complain. She will not even tell me all that he has done to her.
She never told me of those marks on her arm that you saw this morning, but I know very well that they come from a stab with a hatpin.
The sly devil-God forgive me that I should speak of him so, now that he is dead! But a devil he was, if ever one walked the earth.
He was all honey when first we met him-only eighteen months ago, and we both feel as if it were eighteen years.
She had only just arrived in London. Yes, it was her first voyage-she had never been from home before.
He won her with his title and his money and his false London ways. If she made a mistake she has paid for it, if ever a woman did.
What month did we meet him? Well, I tell you it was just after we arrived. We arrived in June, and it was July.
They were married in January of last year. Yes, she is down in the morning-room again, and I have no doubt she will see you, but you must not ask too much of her, for she has gone through all that flesh and blood will stand.
Lady Brackenstall was reclining on the same couch, but looked brighter than before. The maid had entered with us, and began once more to foment the bruise upon her mistress's brow.
No, no, Lady Brackenstall-it is no use. You may have heard of any little reputation which I possess. I will stake it all on the fact that your story is an absolute fabrication.
For an instant there was hesitation in her beautiful face. Then some new strong thought caused it to set like a mask.
Holmes took his hat and shrugged his shoulders. "I am sorry," he said, and without another word we left the room and the house.
There was a pond in the park, and to this my friend led the way. It was frozen over, but a single hole was left for the convenience of a solitary swan.
Holmes gazed at it, and then passed on to the lodge gate. There he scribbled a short note for Stanley Hopkins, and left it with the lodge-keeper.
"It may be a hit, or it may be a miss, but we are bound to do something for friend Hopkins, just to justify this second visit," said he.
There is a second line of steamers which connect South Australia with England, but we will draw the larger cover first.
Holmes's card sent in to the manager ensured instant attention, and he was not long in acquiring all the information he needed.
In June of '95, only one of their line had reached a home port. It was the _Rock of Gibraltar_, their largest and best boat.
A reference to the passenger list showed that Miss Fraser, of Adelaide, with her maid had made the voyage in her.
The boat was now somewhere south of the Suez Canal on her way to Australia. Her officers were the same as in '95, with one exception.
The first officer, Mr. Jack Crocker, had been made a captain and was to take charge of their new ship, the _Bass Rock_, sailing in two days' time from Southampton.
He lived at Sydenham, but he was likely to be in that morning for instructions, if we cared to wait for him.
No, Mr. Holmes had no desire to see him, but would be glad to know more about his record and character.
That was the pith of the information with which Holmes left the office of the Adelaide-Southampton company.
Thence he drove to Scotland Yard, but, instead of entering, he sat in his cab with his brows drawn down, lost in profound thought.
Finally he drove round to the Charing Cross telegraph office, sent off a message, and then, at last, we made for Baker Street once more.
"No, I couldn't do it, Watson," said he, as we reentered our room. "Once that warrant was made out, nothing on earth would save him.
Once or twice in my career I feel that I have done more real harm by my discovery of the criminal than ever he had done by his crime.
I have learned caution now, and I had rather play tricks with the law of England than with my own conscience.
Before evening, we had a visit from Inspector Stanley Hopkins. Things were not going very well with him.
I believe that you are a wizard, Mr. Holmes. I really do sometimes think that you have powers that are not human.
But you haven't helped me. You have made the affair far more difficult. What sort of burglars are they who steal silver and then throw it into the nearest pond?
It was certainly rather eccentric behaviour. I was merely going on the idea that if the silver had been taken by persons who did not want it-who merely took it for a blind, as it were-then they would naturally be anxious to get rid of it.
Well, I thought it was possible. When they came out through the French window, there was the pond with one tempting little hole in the ice, right in front of their noses.
Quite so, you have got an admirable theory. I have no doubt that my own ideas were quite wild, but you must admit that they have ended in discovering the silver.
Dear me, Hopkins! That is certainly rather against your theory that they committed a murder in Kent last night.
It is fatal, Mr. Holmes-absolutely fatal. Still, there are other gangs of three besides the Randalls, or it may be some new gang of which the police have never heard.
Yes, Mr. Holmes, there is no rest for me until I have got to the bottom of the business. I suppose you have no hint to give me?
Ah, that's the question, of course. But I commend the idea to your mind. You might possibly find that there was something in it.
Dinner was over, and the table cleared before Holmes alluded to the matter again. He had lit his pipe and held his slippered feet to the cheerful blaze of the fire.
A very sensible reply, Watson. You must look at it this way: what I know is unofficial, what he knows is official.
I have the right to private judgment, but he has none. He must disclose all, or he is a traitor to his service.
In a doubtful case I would not put him in so painful a position, and so I reserve my information until my own mind is clear upon the matter.
There was a sound upon the stairs, and our door was opened to admit as fine a specimen of manhood as ever passed through it.
He was a very tall young man, golden-moustached, blue-eyed, with a skin which had been burned by tropical suns, and a springy step, which showed that the huge frame was as active as it was strong.
He closed the door behind him, and then he stood with clenched hands and heaving breast, choking down some overmastering emotion.
I got your telegram, and I came at the hour you said. I heard that you had been down to the office. There was no getting away from you.
Let's hear the worst. What are you going to do with me? Arrest me? Speak out, man! You can't sit there and play with me like a cat with a mouse.
"Give him a cigar," said Holmes. "Bite on that, Captain Crocker, and don't let your nerves run away with you.
I should not sit here smoking with you if I thought that you were a common criminal, you may be sure of that.
To give me a true account of all that happened at the Abbey Grange last night-a true account, mind you, with nothing added and nothing taken off.
I know so much already that if you go one inch off the straight, I'll blow this police whistle from my window and the affair goes out of my hands forever.
Then I took a drop myself. Theresa was as cool as ice, and it was her plot as much as mine. We must make it appear that burglars had done the thing.
Theresa kept on repeating our story to her mistress, while I swarmed up and cut the rope of the bell.
Then I lashed her in her chair, and frayed out the end of the rope to make it look natural, else they would wonder how in the world a burglar could have got up there to cut it.
Then I gathered up a few plates and pots of silver, to carry out the idea of the robbery, and there I left them, with orders to give the alarm when I had a quarter of an hour's start.
I dropped the silver into the pond, and made off for Sydenham, feeling that for once in my life I had done a real good night's work.
"That's what I think," said he. "I know that every word is true, for you have hardly said a word which I did not know.
No one but an acrobat or a sailor could have got up to that bell-rope from the bracket, and no one but a sailor could have made the knots with which the cord was fastened to the chair.
You see how easy it was for me to lay my hands upon you when once I had started upon the right trail.
I am not sure that in defence of your own life your action will not be pronounced legitimate. However, that is for a British jury to decide.
Meanwhile I have so much sympathy for you that, if you choose to disappear in the next twenty-four hours, I will promise you that no one will hinder you.
What sort of proposal is that to make a man? I know enough of law to understand that Mary would be held as accomplice.
Do you think I would leave her alone to face the music while I slunk away? No, sir, let them do their worst upon me, but for heaven's sake, Mr. Holmes, find some way of keeping my poor Mary out of the courts.
See here, Captain Crocker, we'll do this in due form of law. You are the prisoner. Watson, you are a British jury, and I never met a man who was more eminently fitted to represent one.
I am the judge. Now, gentleman of the jury, you have heard the evidence. Do you find the prisoner guilty or not guilty?
Come back to this lady in a year, and may her future and yours justify us in the judgment which we have pronounced this night!
I had intended "The Adventure of the Abbey Grange" to be the last of those exploits of my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, which I should ever communicate to the public.
The real reason lay in the reluctance which Mr. Holmes has shown to the continued publication of his experiences.
If in telling the story I seem to be somewhat vague in certain details, the public will readily understand that there is an excellent reason for my reticence.
The one, austere, high-nosed, eagle-eyed, and dominant, was none other than the illustrious Lord Bellinger, twice Premier of Britain.
They sat side by side upon our paper-littered settee, and it was easy to see from their worn and anxious faces that it was business of the most pressing importance which had brought them.
The Premier's thin, blue-veined hands were clasped tightly over the ivory head of his umbrella, and his gaunt, ascetic face looked gloomily from Holmes to me.
The European Secretary pulled nervously at his moustache and fidgeted with the seals of his watch-chain.
When I discovered my loss, Mr. Holmes, which was at eight o'clock this morning, I at once informed the Prime Minister.
"No, sir," said the Prime Minister, with the quick, decisive manner for which he was famous. "We have not done so, nor is it possible that we should do so.
To inform the police must, in the long run, mean to inform the public. This is what we particularly desire to avoid.
Because the document in question is of such immense importance that its publication might very easily-I might almost say probably-lead to European complications of the utmost moment.
It is not too much to say that peace or war may hang upon the issue. Unless its recovery can be attended with the utmost secrecy, then it may as well not be recovered at all, for all that is aimed at by those who have taken it is that its contents should be generally known.
I understand. Now, Mr. Trelawney Hope, I should be much obliged if you would tell me exactly the circumstances under which this document disappeared.
That can be done in a very few words, Mr. Holmes. The letter-for it was a letter from a foreign potentate-was received six days ago.
It was of such importance that I have never left it in my safe, but have taken it across each evening to my house in Whitehall Terrace, and kept it in my bedroom in a locked despatch-box.
It was there last night. Of that I am certain. I actually opened the box while I was dressing for dinner and saw the document inside.
This morning it was gone. The despatch-box had stood beside the glass upon my dressing-table all night.
I am a light sleeper, and so is my wife. We are both prepared to swear that no one could have entered the room during the night.
My wife had gone to the theatre. I waited up for her. It was half-past eleven before we went to our room.
No one is ever permitted to enter that room save the house-maid in the morning, and my valet, or my wife's maid, during the rest of the day.
They are both trusty servants who have been with us for some time. Besides, neither of them could possibly have known that there was anything more valuable than the ordinary departmental papers in my despatch-box.
"I have long known, sir, how high is your sense of public duty," said he. "I am convinced that in the case of a secret of this importance it would rise superior to the most intimate domestic ties."
You do me no more than justice, sir. Until this morning I have never breathed one word to my wife upon this matter.
Each member of the Cabinet was informed of it yesterday, but the pledge of secrecy which attends every Cabinet meeting was increased by the solemn warning which was given by the Prime Minister.
Good heavens, to think that within a few hours I should myself have lost it!" His handsome face was distorted with a spasm of despair, and his hands tore at his hair.
For a moment we caught a glimpse of the natural man, impulsive, ardent, keenly sensitive. The next the aristocratic mask was replaced, and the gentle voice had returned.
Besides the members of the Cabinet there are two, or possibly three, departmental officials who know of the letter.
I believe that no one abroad has seen it save the man who wrote it. I am well convinced that his Ministers-that the usual official channels have not been employed.
Now, sir, I must ask you more particularly what this document is, and why its disappearance should have such momentous consequences?
Mr. Holmes, the envelope is a long, thin one of pale blue colour. There is a seal of red wax stamped with a crouching lion.
"I fear, sir," said Holmes, "that, interesting and indeed essential as these details are, my inquiries must go more to the root of things.
That is a State secret of the utmost importance, and I fear that I cannot tell you, nor do I see that it is necessary.
If by the aid of the powers which you are said to possess you can find such an envelope as I describe with its enclosure, you will have deserved well of your country, and earned any reward which it lies in our power to bestow.
"You are two of the most busy men in the country," said he, "and in my own small way I have also a good many calls upon me.
I regret exceedingly that I cannot help you in this matter, and any continuation of this interview would be a waste of time.
The Premier sprang to his feet with that quick, fierce gleam of his deep-set eyes before which a Cabinet has cowered.
"I am not accustomed, sir," he began, but mastered his anger and resumed his seat. For a minute or more we all sat in silence.
We must accept your terms, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right, and it is unreasonable for us to expect you to act unless we give you our entire confidence.
Then I will tell you, relying entirely upon your honour and that of your colleague, Dr. Watson. I may appeal to your patriotism also, for I could not imagine a greater misfortune for the country than that this affair should come out.
The letter, then, is from a certain foreign potentate who has been ruffled by some recent Colonial developments of this country.
It has been written hurriedly and upon his own responsibility entirely. Inquiries have shown that his Ministers know nothing of the matter.
There would be such a ferment, sir, that I do not hesitate to say that within a week of the publication of that letter this country would be involved in a great war.
Exactly. It was he. And it is this letter-this letter which may well mean the expenditure of a thousand millions and the lives of a hundred thousand men-which has become lost in this unaccountable fashion.
No, sir, we have strong reason to believe that he already understands that he has acted in an indiscreet and hot-headed manner.
If this is so, whose interest is it that the letter should come out? Why should anyone desire to steal it or to publish it?
There, Mr. Holmes, you take me into regions of high international politics. But if you consider the European situation you will have no difficulty in perceiving the motive.
The whole of Europe is an armed camp. There is a double league which makes a fair balance of military power.
Great Britain holds the scales. If Britain were driven into war with one confederacy, it would assure the supremacy of the other confederacy, whether they joined in the war or not.
Very clearly. It is then the interest of the enemies of this potentate to secure and publish this letter, so as to make a breach between his country and ours?
To any of the great Chancelleries of Europe. It is probably speeding on its way thither at the present instant as fast as steam can take it.
Mr. Trelawney Hope dropped his head on his chest and groaned aloud. The Premier placed his hand kindly upon his shoulder.
It is your misfortune, my dear fellow. No one can blame you. There is no precaution which you have neglected.
Now, sir, if a document of this importance were taken at that hour, where can it be now? No one has any reason to retain it.
It has been passed rapidly on to those who need it. What chance have we now to overtake or even to trace it?
I understand you to say that your room is on the second floor, that there is no entrance from without, and that from within no one could go up unobserved.
It must, then, be somebody in the house who has taken it. To whom would the thief take it? To one of several international spies and secret agents, whose names are tolerably familiar to me.
There are three who may be said to be the heads of their profession. I will begin my research by going round and finding if each of them is at his post.
If one is missing-especially if he has disappeared since last night-we will have some indication as to where the document has gone.
"Why should he be missing?" asked the European Secretary. "He would take the letter to an Embassy in London, as likely as not."
I fancy not. These agents work independently, and their relations with the Embassies are often strained.
I believe you are right, Mr. Holmes. He would take so valuable a prize to headquarters with his own hands.
I think that your course of action is an excellent one. Meanwhile, Hope, we cannot neglect all our other duties on account of this one misfortune.
Should there be any fresh developments during the day we shall communicate with you, and you will no doubt let us know the results of your own inquiries.
When our illustrious visitors had departed Holmes lit his pipe in silence and sat for some time lost in the deepest thought.
I had opened the morning paper and was immersed in a sensational crime which had occurred in London the night before, when my friend gave an exclamation, sprang to his feet, and laid his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.
"Yes," said he, "there is no better way of approaching it. The situation is desperate, but not hopeless.
Even now, if we could be sure which of them has taken it, it is just possible that it has not yet passed out of his hands.
After all, it is a question of money with these fellows, and I have the British treasury behind me. If it's on the market I'll buy it-if it means another penny on the income-tax.
It is conceivable that the fellow might hold it back to see what bids come from this side before he tries his luck on the other.
There are only those three capable of playing so bold a game-there are Oberstein, La Rothiere, and Eduardo Lucas.
My friend has so often astonished me in the course of our adventures that it was with a sense of exultation that I realized how completely I had astonished him.
He stared in amazement, and then snatched the paper from my hands. This was the paragraph which I had been engaged in reading when he rose from his chair:
Mr. Lucas is an unmarried man, thirty-four years of age, and his establishment consists of Mrs. Pringle, an elderly housekeeper, and of Mitton, his valet.
The former retires early and sleeps at the top of the house. The valet was out for the evening, visiting a friend at Hammersmith.
He then pushed open the door and entered. The room was in a state of wild disorder, the furniture being all swept to one side, and one chair lying on its back in the centre.
Beside this chair, and still grasping one of its legs, lay the unfortunate tenant of the house. He had been stabbed to the heart and must have died instantly.
The knife with which the crime had been committed was a curved Indian dagger, plucked down from a trophy of Oriental arms which adorned one of the walls.
Robbery does not appear to have been the motive of the crime, for there had been no attempt to remove the valuable contents of the room.
Mr. Eduardo Lucas was so well-known and popular that his violent and mysterious fate will arouse painful interest and intense sympathy in a widespread circle of friends.
A coincidence! Here is one of the three men whom we had named as possible actors in this drama, and he meets a violent death during the very hours when we know that that drama was being enacted.
The odds are enormous against its being coincidence. No figures could express them. No, my dear Watson, the two events are connected-_must_ be connected.
Not at all. They know all they see at Godolphin Street. They know-and shall know-nothing of Whitehall Terrace.
Only we know of both events, and can trace the relation between them. There is one obvious point which would, in any case, have turned my suspicions against Lucas.
Godolphin Street, Westminster, is only a few minutes' walk from Whitehall Terrace. The other secret agents whom I have named live in the extreme West End.
Mrs. Hudson had appeared with a lady's card upon her salver. Holmes glanced at it, raised his eyebrows, and handed it over to me.
A moment later our modest apartment, already so distinguished that morning, was further honoured by the entrance of the most lovely woman in London.
And yet as we saw it that autumn morning, it was not its beauty which would be the first thing to impress the observer.
The cheek was lovely but it was paled with emotion, the eyes were bright but it was the brightness of fever, the sensitive mouth was tight and drawn in an effort after self-command.
Terror-not beauty-was what sprang first to the eye as our fair visitor stood framed for an instant in the open door.
"Mr. Holmes. I implore you not to tell him that I came here." Holmes bowed coldly, and motioned the lady to a chair.
Your ladyship places me in a very delicate position. I beg that you will sit down and tell me what you desire, but I fear that I cannot make any unconditional promise.
She swept across the room and seated herself with her back to the window. It was a queenly presence-tall, graceful, and intensely womanly.
"Mr. Holmes," she said-and her white-gloved hands clasped and unclasped as she spoke-"I will speak frankly to you in the hopes that it may induce you to speak frankly in return.
There is complete confidence between my husband and me on all matters save one. That one is politics.
On this his lips are sealed. He tells me nothing. Now, I am aware that there was a most deplorable occurrence in our house last night.
I know that a paper has disappeared. But because the matter is political my husband refuses to take me into his complete confidence.
Now it is essential-essential, I say-that I should thoroughly understand it. You are the only other person, save only these politicians, who knows the true facts.
I beg you then, Mr. Holmes, to tell me exactly what has happened and what it will lead to. Tell me all, Mr. Holmes.
Let no regard for your client's interests keep you silent, for I assure you that his interests, if he would only see it, would be best served by taking me into his complete confidence.
I have asked him. I come to you as a last resource. But without your telling me anything definite, Mr. Holmes, you may do a great service if you would enlighten me on one point.
One more question, Mr. Holmes. From an expression which my husband dropped in the first shock of this disaster I understood that terrible public consequences might arise from the loss of this document.
She looked back at us from the door, and I had a last impression of that beautiful haunted face, the startled eyes, and the drawn mouth.
"Now, Watson, the fair sex is your department," said Holmes, with a smile, when the dwindling frou-frou of skirts had ended in the slam of the front door.
Hum! Think of her appearance, Watson-her manner, her suppressed excitement, her restlessness, her tenacity in asking questions.
Remember also the curious earnestness with which she assured us that it was best for her husband that she should know all.
And yet the motives of women are so inscrutable. You remember the woman at Margate whom I suspected for the same reason.
Yes, I will while away the morning at Godolphin Street with our friends of the regular establishment.
With Eduardo Lucas lies the solution of our problem, though I must admit that I have not an inkling as to what form it may take.
It is a capital mistake to theorize in advance of the facts. Do you stay on guard, my good Watson, and receive any fresh visitors.
All that day and the next and the next Holmes was in a mood which his friends would call taciturn, and others morose.
He ran out and ran in, smoked incessantly, played snatches on his violin, sank into reveries, devoured sandwiches at irregular hours, and hardly answered the casual questions which I put to him.
The coroner's jury brought in the obvious Wilful Murder, but the parties remained as unknown as ever.
No motive was suggested. The room was full of articles of value, but none had been taken. The dead man's papers had not been tampered with.
They were carefully examined, and showed that he was a keen student of international politics, an indefatigable gossip, a remarkable linguist, and an untiring letter writer.
He had been on intimate terms with the leading politicians of several countries. But nothing sensational was discovered among the documents which filled his drawers.
As to his relations with women, they appeared to have been promiscuous but superficial. He had many acquaintances among them, but few friends, and no one whom he loved.
His habits were regular, his conduct inoffensive. His death was an absolute mystery and likely to remain so.
As to the arrest of John Mitton, the valet, it was a council of despair as an alternative to absolute inaction.
But no case could be sustained against him. He had visited friends in Hammersmith that night. The alibi was complete.
He had actually arrived at twelve o'clock, and appeared to be overwhelmed by the unexpected tragedy. He had always been on good terms with his master.
Mitton had been in Lucas's employment for three years. It was noticeable that Lucas did not take Mitton on the Continent with him.
Sometimes he visited Paris for three months on end, but Mitton was left in charge of the Godolphin Street house.
As to the housekeeper, she had heard nothing on the night of the crime. If her master had a visitor he had himself admitted him.
Upon the fourth day there appeared a long telegram from Paris which seemed to solve the whole question.
Our readers will remember that the deceased gentleman was found stabbed in his room, and that some suspicion attached to his valet, but that the case broke down on an _alibi_.
Yesterday a lady, who has been known as Mme. Henri Fournaye, occupying a small villa in the Rue Austerlitz, was reported to the authorities by her servants as being insane.
An examination showed she had indeed developed mania of a dangerous and permanent form. On inquiry, the police have discovered that Mme.
Henri Fournaye only returned from a journey to London on Tuesday last, and there is evidence to connect her with the crime at Westminster.
Mme. Fournaye, who is of Creole origin, is of an extremely excitable nature, and has suffered in the past from attacks of jealousy which have amounted to frenzy.
It is conjectured that it was in one of these that she committed the terrible crime which has caused such a sensation in London.
It is probable, therefore, that the crime was either committed when insane, or that its immediate effect was to drive the unhappy woman out of her mind.
At present she is unable to give any coherent account of the past, and the doctors hold out no hopes of the reestablishment of her reason.
There is evidence that a woman, who might have been Mme. Fournaye, was seen for some hours upon Monday night watching the house in Godolphin Street.
"What do you think of that, Holmes?" I had read the account aloud to him, while he finished his breakfast.
The man's death is a mere incident-a trivial episode-in comparison with our real task, which is to trace this document and save a European catastrophe.
Now, if this letter were loose-no, it can't be loose-but if it isn't loose, where can it be? Who has it?
Why is it held back? That's the question that beats in my brain like a hammer. Was it, indeed, a coincidence that Lucas should meet his death on the night when the letter disappeared?
Did the letter ever reach him? If so, why is it not among his papers? Did this mad wife of his carry it off with her?
If so, is it in her house in Paris? How could I search for it without the French police having their suspicions aroused?
It is a case, my dear Watson, where the law is as dangerous to us as the criminals are. Every man's hand is against us, and yet the interests at stake are colossal.
Should I bring it to a successful conclusion, it will certainly represent the crowning glory of my career.
Ah, here is my latest from the front!" He glanced hurriedly at the note which had been handed in. "Halloa!
Lestrade seems to have observed something of interest. Put on your hat, Watson, and we will stroll down together to Westminster.
It was my first visit to the scene of the crime-a high, dingy, narrow-chested house, prim, formal, and solid, like the century which gave it birth.
Lestrade's bulldog features gazed out at us from the front window, and he greeted us warmly when a big constable had opened the door and let us in.
The room into which we were shown was that in which the crime had been committed, but no trace of it now remained save an ugly, irregular stain upon the carpet.
This carpet was a small square drugget in the centre of the room, surrounded by a broad expanse of beautiful, old-fashioned wood-flooring in square blocks, highly polished.
Over the fireplace was a magnificent trophy of weapons, one of which had been used on that tragic night.
In the window was a sumptuous writing-desk, and every detail of the apartment, the pictures, the rugs, and the hangings, all pointed to a taste which was luxurious to the verge of effeminacy.
She told him how she had traced him, reproached him. One thing led to another, and then with that dagger so handy the end soon came.
It wasn't all done in an instant, though, for these chairs were all swept over yonder, and he had one in his hand as if he had tried to hold her off with it.
Ah, yes, that's another matter-a mere trifle, but the sort of thing you take an interest in-queer, you know, and what you might call freakish.
Well, you know, after a crime of this sort we are very careful to keep things in their position. Nothing has been moved.
Officer in charge here day and night. This morning, as the man was buried and the investigation over-so far as this room is concerned-we thought we could tidy up a bit.
This carpet. You see, it is not fastened down, only just laid there. We had occasion to raise it. We found--
Well, I'm sure you would never guess in a hundred years what we did find. You see that stain on the carpet?
He took the corner of the carpet in his hand and, turning it over, he showed that it was indeed as he said.
Now, I'll show you the explanation. There is a second stain, but it does not correspond with the other.
See for yourself." As he spoke he turned over another portion of the carpet, and there, sure enough, was a great crimson spill upon the square white facing of the old-fashioned floor.
Why, it is simple enough. The two stains did correspond, but the carpet has been turned round. As it was square and unfastened it was easily done.
The official police don't need you, Mr. Holmes, to tell them that the carpet must have been turned round.
That's clear enough, for the stains lie above each other-if you lay it over this way. But what I want to know is, who shifted the carpet, and why?
"Look here, Lestrade," said he, "has that constable in the passage been in charge of the place all the time?"
Well, take my advice. Examine him carefully. Don't do it before us. We'll wait here. You take him into the back room.
You'll be more likely to get a confession out of him alone. Ask him how he dared to admit people and leave them alone in this room.
Don't ask him if he has done it. Take it for granted. Tell him you know someone has been here. Press him.
"By George, if he knows I'll have it out of him!" cried Lestrade. He darted into the hall, and a few moments later his bullying voice sounded from the back room.
"Now, Watson, now!" cried Holmes with frenzied eagerness. All the demoniacal force of the man masked behind that listless manner burst out in a paroxysm of energy.
He tore the drugget from the floor, and in an instant was down on his hands and knees clawing at each of the squares of wood beneath it.
One turned sideways as he dug his nails into the edge of it. It hinged back like the lid of a box. A small black cavity opened beneath it.
Holmes plunged his eager hand into it and drew it out with a bitter snarl of anger and disappointment.
"Quick, Watson, quick! Get it back again!" The wooden lid was replaced, and the drugget had only just been drawn straight when Lestrade's voice was heard in the passage.
He found Holmes leaning languidly against the mantelpiece, resigned and patient, endeavouring to conceal his irrepressible yawns.
Sorry to keep you waiting, Mr. Holmes, I can see that you are bored to death with the whole affair. Well, he has confessed, all right.
I meant no harm, sir, I'm sure. The young woman came to the door last evening-mistook the house, she did.
She wanted to see where the crime was done-had read about it in the papers, she said. She was a very respectable, well-spoken young woman, sir, and I saw no harm in letting her have a peep.
When she saw that mark on the carpet, down she dropped on the floor, and lay as if she were dead. I ran to the back and got some water, but I could not bring her to.
Then I went round the corner to the Ivy Plant for some brandy, and by the time I had brought it back the young woman had recovered and was off-ashamed of herself, I daresay, and dared not face me.
Well, sir, it was a bit rumpled, certainly, when I came back. You see, she fell on it and it lies on a polished floor with nothing to keep it in place.
It's lucky for you, my man, that nothing is missing, or you would find yourself in Queer Street. I'm sorry to have called you down over such a petty business, Mr. Holmes, but I thought the point of the second stain not corresponding with the first would interest you.
Don't know the name, sir. Was answering an advertisement about typewriting and came to the wrong number-very pleasant, genteel young woman, sir.
Yes, sir, she was a well-grown young woman. I suppose you might say she was handsome. Perhaps some would say she was very handsome.
'Oh, officer, do let me have a peep!' says she. She had pretty, coaxing ways, as you might say, and I thought there was no harm in letting her just put her head through the door.
As we left the house Lestrade remained in the front room, while the repentant constable opened the door to let us out.
"Good Lord, sir!" he cried, with amazement on his face. Holmes put his finger on his lips, replaced his hand in his breast pocket, and burst out laughing as we turned down the street.
"Excellent!" said he. "Come, friend Watson, the curtain rings up for the last act. You will be relieved to hear that there will be no war, that the Right Honourable Trelawney Hope will suffer no setback in his brilliant career, that the indiscreet Sovereign will receive no punishment for his indiscretion, that the Prime Minister will have no European complication to deal with, and that with a little tact and management upon our part nobody will be a penny the worse for what might have been a very ugly incident."
Hardly that, Watson. There are some points which are as dark as ever. But we have so much that it will be our own fault if we cannot get the rest.
When we arrived at the residence of the European Secretary it was for Lady Hilda Trelawney Hope that Sherlock Holmes inquired.
"Mr. Holmes!" said the lady, and her face was pink with her indignation. "This is surely most unfair and ungenerous upon your part.
I desired, as I have explained, to keep my visit to you a secret, lest my husband should think that I was intruding into his affairs.
And yet you compromise me by coming here and so showing that there are business relations between us.
Unfortunately, madam, I had no possible alternative. I have been commissioned to recover this immensely important paper.
The lady sprang to her feet, with the colour all dashed in an instant from her beautiful face. Her eyes glazed-she tottered-I thought that she would faint.
Then with a grand effort she rallied from the shock, and a supreme astonishment and indignation chased every other expression from her features.
Do not ring, Lady Hilda. If you do, then all my earnest efforts to avoid a scandal will be frustrated.
Give up the letter and all will be set right. If you will work with me I can arrange everything. If you work against me I must expose you.
She stood grandly defiant, a queenly figure, her eyes fixed upon his as if she would read his very soul.
You are trying to frighten me. It is not a very manly thing, Mr. Holmes, to come here and browbeat a woman.
Pray sit down, madam. You will hurt yourself there if you fall. I will not speak until you sit down. Thank you.
One is enough, Lady Hilda. I know of your visit to Eduardo Lucas, of your giving him this document, of your ingenious return to the room last night, and of the manner in which you took the letter from the hiding-place under the carpet.
He drew a small piece of cardboard from his pocket. It was the face of a woman cut out of a portrait.
"I have carried this because I thought it might be useful," said he. "The policeman has recognized it."
Come, Lady Hilda. You have the letter. The matter may still be adjusted. I have no desire to bring trouble to you.
My duty ends when I have returned the lost letter to your husband. Take my advice and be frank with me.
The butler had hardly closed the door behind him when Lady Hilda was down on her knees at Holmes's feet, her hands outstretched, her beautiful face upturned and wet with her tears.
"Oh, spare me, Mr. Holmes! Spare me!" she pleaded, in a frenzy of supplication. "For heaven's sake, don't tell him!
I love him so! I would not bring one shadow on his life, and this I know would break his noble heart.
Holmes raised the lady. "I am thankful, madam, that you have come to your senses even at this last moment!
"How can we return it?" Holmes muttered. "Quick, quick, we must think of some way! Where is the despatch-box?"
"What a stroke of luck! Quick, madam, bring it here!" A moment later she had appeared with a red flat box in her hand.
From out of her bosom Lady Hilda had drawn a small key. The box flew open. It was stuffed with papers.
Holmes thrust the blue envelope deep down into the heart of them, between the leaves of some other document.
"Now we are ready for him," said Holmes. "We have still ten minutes. I am going far to screen you, Lady Hilda.
In return you will spend the time in telling me frankly the real meaning of this extraordinary affair.
"Mr. Holmes, I will tell you everything," cried the lady. "Oh, Mr. Holmes, I would cut off my right hand before I gave him a moment of sorrow!
There is no woman in all London who loves her husband as I do, and yet if he knew how I have acted-how I have been compelled to act-he would never forgive me.
For his own honour stands so high that he could not forget or pardon a lapse in another. Help me, Mr. Holmes!
It was a letter of mine, Mr. Holmes, an indiscreet letter written before my marriage-a foolish letter, a letter of an impulsive, loving girl.
I meant no harm, and yet he would have thought it criminal. Had he read that letter his confidence would have been forever destroyed.
I implored his mercy. He said that he would return my letter if I would bring him a certain document which he described in my husband's despatch-box.
He had some spy in the office who had told him of its existence. He assured me that no harm could come to my husband.
I did it, Mr. Holmes! I took an impression of his key. This man, Lucas, furnished a duplicate. I opened his despatch-box, took the paper, and conveyed it to Godolphin Street.
It was the next morning that I realized that I had only exchanged one trouble for another. My husband's anguish at the loss of his paper went to my heart.
I could hardly prevent myself from there and then kneeling down at his feet and telling him what I had done.
But that again would mean a confession of the past. I came to you that morning in order to understand the full enormity of my offence.
From the instant that I grasped it my whole mind was turned to the one thought of getting back my husband's paper.
It must still be where Lucas had placed it, for it was concealed before this dreadful woman entered the room.
If it had not been for her coming, I should not have known where his hiding-place was. How was I to get into the room?
For two days I watched the place, but the door was never left open. Last night I made a last attempt.
"Ah, thank heaven!" His face became radiant. "The Prime Minister is lunching with me. May he share your hopes?
He has nerves of steel, and yet I know that he has hardly slept since this terrible event. Jacobs, will you ask the Prime Minister to come up?
As to you, dear, I fear that this is a matter of politics. We will join you in a few minutes in the dining-room.
The Prime Minister's manner was subdued, but I could see by the gleam of his eyes and the twitchings of his bony hands that he shared the excitement of his young colleague.
"Purely negative as yet," my friend answered. "I have inquired at every point where it might be, and I am sure that there is no danger to be apprehended."
But that is not enough, Mr. Holmes. We cannot live forever on such a volcano. We must have something definite.
I am in hopes of getting it. That is why I am here. The more I think of the matter the more convinced I am that the letter has never left this house.
But I am not convinced of it. I have known such things to happen. I presume there are other papers there.
Jacobs, bring down my despatch-box. This is a farcical waste of time, but still, if nothing else will satisfy you, it shall be done.
Thank you, Jacobs, put it here. I have always had the key on my watch-chain. Here are the papers, you see.
Letter from Lord Merrow, report from Sir Charles Hardy, memorandum from Belgrade, note on the Russo-German grain taxes, letter from Madrid, note from Lord Flowers--Good heavens!
Thank you! Thank you! What a weight from my heart. But this is inconceivable-impossible. Mr. Holmes, you are a wizard, a sorcerer!
"I cannot believe my eyes!" He ran wildly to the door. "Where is my wife? I must tell her that all is well.
"Come, sir," said he. "There is more in this than meets the eye. How came the letter back in the box?"
The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge The Adventure of the Bruce-Partington Plans The Adventure of the Devil's Foot The Adventure of the Red Circle The Disappearance of Lady Frances Carfax The Adventure of the Dying Detective His Last Bow: The War Service of Sherlock Holmes
I find it recorded in my notebook that it was a bleak and windy day towards the end of March in the year 1892.
"I suppose, Watson, we must look upon you as a man of letters," said he. "How do you define the word 'grotesque'?"
"There is surely something more than that," said he; "some underlying suggestion of the tragic and the terrible.
If you cast your mind back to some of those narratives with which you have afflicted a long-suffering public, you will recognise how often the grotesque has deepened into the criminal.
Think of that little affair of the red-headed men. That was grotesque enough in the outset, and yet it ended in a desperate attempt at robbery.
Or, again, there was that most grotesque affair of the five orange pips, which led straight to a murderous conspiracy.
Life is commonplace, the papers are sterile; audacity and romance seem to have passed forever from the criminal world.
Can you ask me, then, whether I am ready to look into any new problem, however trivial it may prove? But here, unless I am mistaken, is our client.
A measured step was heard upon the stairs, and a moment later a stout, tall, grey-whiskered and solemnly respectable person was ushered into the room.
But some amazing experience had disturbed his native composure and left its traces in his bristling hair, his flushed, angry cheeks, and his flurried, excited manner.
"I have had a most singular and unpleasant experience, Mr. Holmes," said he. "Never in my life have I been placed in such a situation.
It is most improper-most outrageous. I must insist upon some explanation." He swelled and puffed in his anger.
"Pray sit down, Mr. Scott Eccles," said Holmes in a soothing voice. "May I ask, in the first place, why you came to me at all?"
Well, sir, it did not appear to be a matter which concerned the police, and yet, when you have heard the facts, you must admit that I could not leave it where it was.
Private detectives are a class with whom I have absolutely no sympathy, but none the less, having heard your name-
"It is a quarter-past two," he said. "Your telegram was dispatched about one. But no one can glance at your toilet and attire without seeing that your disturbance dates from the moment of your waking."
You are right, Mr. Holmes. I never gave a thought to my toilet. I was only too glad to get out of such a house.
But I have been running round making inquiries before I came to you. I went to the house agents, you know, and they said that Mr. Garcia's rent was paid up all right and that everything was in order at Wisteria Lodge.
"Come, come, sir," said Holmes, laughing. "You are like my friend, Dr. Watson, who has a bad habit of telling his stories wrong end foremost.
Please arrange your thoughts and let me know, in their due sequence, exactly what those events are which have sent you out unbrushed and unkempt, with dress boots and waistcoat buttoned awry, in search of advice and assistance.
I'm sure it must look very bad, Mr. Holmes, and I am not aware that in my whole life such a thing has ever happened before.
But I will tell you the whole queer business, and when I have done so you will admit, I am sure, that there has been enough to excuse me.
He shook hands with Holmes and introduced his comrade as Inspector Baynes, of the Surrey Constabulary.
"We are hunting together, Mr. Holmes, and our trail lay in this direction." He turned his bulldog eyes upon our visitor.
We wish a statement, Mr. Scott Eccles, as to the events which led up to the death last night of Mr. Aloysius Garcia, of Wisteria Lodge, near Esher.
A letter of yours was found in the dead man's pocket, and we know by it that you had planned to pass last night at his house.
Mr. Eccles was going to tell us about it when you entered the room. I think, Watson, a brandy and soda would do him no harm.
Now, sir, I suggest that you take no notice of this addition to your audience, and that you proceed with your narrative exactly as you would have done had you never been interrupted.
Our visitor had gulped off the brandy and the colour had returned to his face. With a dubious glance at the inspector's notebook, he plunged at once into his extraordinary statement.
And now I come to the amazing part of my tale. When I woke it was broad daylight. I glanced at my watch, and the time was nearly nine.
I had particularly asked to be called at eight, so I was very much astonished at this forgetfulness. I sprang up and rang for the servant.
There was no response. I rang again and again, with the same result. Then I came to the conclusion that the bell was out of order.
I huddled on my clothes and hurried downstairs in an exceedingly bad temper to order some hot water. You can imagine my surprise when I found that there was no one there.
I shouted in the hall. There was no answer. Then I ran from room to room. All were deserted. My host had shown me which was his bedroom the night before, so I knocked at the door.
No reply. I turned the handle and walked in. The room was empty, and the bed had never been slept in.
He had gone with the rest. The foreign host, the foreign footman, the foreign cook, all had vanished in the night!
Sherlock Holmes was rubbing his hands and chuckling as he added this bizarre incident to his collection of strange episodes.
"Your experience is, so far as I know, perfectly unique," said he. "May I ask, sir, what you did then?"
I was furious. My first idea was that I had been the victim of some absurd practical joke. I packed my things, banged the hall door behind me, and set off for Esher, with my bag in my hand.
I called at Allan Brothers', the chief land agents in the village, and found that it was from this firm that the villa had been rented.
It struck me that the whole proceeding could hardly be for the purpose of making a fool of me, and that the main object must be to get out of the rent.
It is late in March, so quarter-day is at hand. But this theory would not work. The agent was obliged to me for my warning, but told me that the rent had been paid in advance.
Finally when I got your reply to my wire I came out to you, since I gather that you are a person who gives advice in difficult cases.
But now, Mr. Inspector, I understand, from what you said when you entered the room, that you can carry the story on, and that some tragedy had occurred.
I can assure you that every word I have said is the truth, and that, outside of what I have told you, I know absolutely nothing about the fate of this man.
For example, there was that note which arrived during dinner. Did you chance to observe what became of it?
The country detective was a stout, puffy, red man, whose face was only redeemed from grossness by two extraordinarily bright eyes, almost hidden behind the heavy creases of cheek and brow.
It was a dog-grate, Mr. Holmes, and he overpitched it. I picked this out unburned from the back of it.
It is a woman's writing, done with a sharp-pointed pen, but the address is either done with another pen or by someone else.
"A very remarkable note," said Holmes, glancing it over. "I must compliment you, Mr. Baynes, upon your attention to detail in your examination of it.
A few trifling points might perhaps be added. The oval seal is undoubtedly a plain sleeve-link-what else is of such a shape?
The scissors were bent nail scissors. Short as the two snips are, you can distinctly see the same slight curve in each.
"I thought I had squeezed all the juice out of it, but I see there was a little over," he said. "I'm bound to say that I make nothing of the note except that there was something on hand, and that a woman, as usual was at the bottom of it."
"I am glad you found the note, since it corroborates my story," said he. "But I beg to point out that I have not yet heard what has happened to Mr. Garcia, nor what has become of his household."
"As to Garcia," said Gregson, "that is easily answered. He was found dead this morning upon Oxshott Common, nearly a mile from his home.
His head had been smashed to pulp by heavy blows of a sandbag or some such instrument, which had crushed rather than wounded.
"This is very painful-very painful and terrible," said Mr. Scott Eccles in a querulous voice, "but it is really uncommonly hard on me.
I had nothing to do with my host going off upon a nocturnal excursion and meeting so sad an end. How do I come to be mixed up with the case?
"Very simply, sir," Inspector Baynes answered. "The only document found in the pocket of the deceased was a letter from you saying that you would be with him on the night of his death.
It was the envelope of this letter which gave us the dead man's name and address. It was after nine this morning when we reached his house and found neither you nor anyone else inside it.
I wired to Mr. Gregson to run you down in London while I examined Wisteria Lodge. Then I came into town, joined Mr. Gregson, and here we are.
"I think now," said Gregson, rising, "we had best put this matter into an official shape. You will come round with us to the station, Mr. Scott Eccles, and let us have your statement in writing."
Certainly, I will come at once. But I retain your services, Mr. Holmes. I desire you to spare no expense and no pains to get at the truth.
You appear to have been very prompt and businesslike in all that you have done. Was there any clue, may I ask, as to the exact hour that the man met his death?
He had been there since one o'clock. There was rain about that time, and his death had certainly been before the rain.
"But that is perfectly impossible, Mr. Baynes," cried our client. "His voice is unmistakable. I could swear to it that it was he who addressed me in my bedroom at that very hour."
On the face of it the case is not a very complex one, though it certainly presents some novel and interesting features.
A further knowledge of facts is necessary before I would venture to give a final and definite opinion.
By the way, Mr. Baynes, did you find anything remarkable besides this note in your examination of the house?
"There were," said he, "one or two very remarkable things. Perhaps when I have finished at the police-station you would care to come out and give me your opinion of them."
"I am entirely at your service," said Sherlock Holmes, ringing the bell. "You will show these gentlemen out, Mrs. Hudson, and kindly send the boy with this telegram.
We sat for some time in silence after our visitors had left. Holmes smoked hard, with his brows drawn down over his keen eyes, and his head thrust forward in the eager way characteristic of the man.
Well, taken with the disappearance of the man's companions, I should say that they were in some way concerned in the murder and had fled from justice.
Quite so. Why did they fly? There is a big fact. Another big fact is the remarkable experience of our client, Scott Eccles.
Now, my dear Watson, is it beyond the limits of human ingenuity to furnish an explanation which would cover both of these big facts?
If it were one which would also admit of the mysterious note with its very curious phraseology, why, then it would be worth accepting as a temporary hypothesis.
If the fresh facts which come to our knowledge all fit themselves into the scheme, then our hypothesis may gradually become a solution.
You must admit, my dear Watson, that the idea of a joke is impossible. There were grave events afoot, as the sequel showed, and the coaxing of Scott Eccles to Wisteria Lodge had some connection with them.
Let us take it link by link. There is, on the face of it, something unnatural about this strange and sudden friendship between the young Spaniard and Scott Eccles.
It was the former who forced the pace. He called upon Eccles at the other end of London on the very day after he first met him, and he kept in close touch with him until he got him down to Esher.
Now, what did he want with Eccles? What could Eccles supply? I see no charm in the man. He is not particularly intelligent-not a man likely to be congenial to a quick-witted Latin.
Why, then, was he picked out from all the other people whom Garcia met as particularly suited to his purpose?
Has he any one outstanding quality? I say that he has. He is the very type of conventional British respectability, and the very man as a witness to impress another Briton.
You saw yourself how neither of the inspectors dreamed of questioning his statement, extraordinary as it was.
Nothing, as things turned out, but everything had they gone another way. That is how I read the matter.
Exactly, my dear Watson; he might have proved an alibi. We will suppose, for argument's sake, that the household of Wisteria Lodge are confederates in some design.
If Garcia could do whatever he had to do and be back by the hour mentioned he had evidently a powerful reply to any accusation.
Here was this irreproachable Englishman ready to swear in any court of law that the accused was in the house all the time.
I have not all my facts yet, but I do not think there are any insuperable difficulties. Still, it is an error to argue in front of your data.
How did it run? 'Our own colours, green and white.' Sounds like racing. 'Green open, white shut.' That is clearly a signal.
'Main stair, first corridor, seventh right, green baize.' This is an assignation. We may find a jealous husband at the bottom of it all.
It was clearly a dangerous quest. She would not have said 'Godspeed' had it not been so. 'D'-that should be a guide.
Good, Watson, very good-but quite inadmissable. A Spaniard would write to a Spaniard in Spanish. The writer of this note is certainly English.
Well, we can only possess our soul in patience until this excellent inspector come back for us. Meanwhile we can thank our lucky fate which has rescued us for a few short hours from the insufferable fatigues of idleness.
An answer had arrived to Holmes's telegram before our Surrey officer had returned. Holmes read it and was about to place it in his notebook when he caught a glimpse of my expectant face.
Lord Harringby, The Dingle; Sir George Ffolliott, Oxshott Towers; Mr. Hynes Hynes, J.P., Purdley Place; Mr. James Baker Williams, Forton Old Hall; Mr. Henderson, High Gable; Rev.
"This is a very obvious way of limiting our field of operations," said Holmes. "No doubt Baynes, with his methodical mind, has already adopted some similar plan."
Well, my dear fellow, we have already arrived at the conclusion that the message received by Garcia at dinner was an appointment or an assignation.
As the number of large houses close to Oxshott must be limited, I adopted the obvious method of sending to the agents mentioned by Scott Eccles and obtaining a list of them.
It was nearly six o'clock before we found ourselves in the pretty Surrey village of Esher, with Inspector Baynes as our companion.
Holmes and I had taken things for the night, and found comfortable quarters at the Bull. Finally we set out in the company of the detective on our visit to Wisteria Lodge.
It was a cold, dark March evening, with a sharp wind and a fine rain beating upon our faces, a fit setting for the wild common over which our road passed and the tragic goal to which it led us.
A cold and melancholy walk of a couple of miles brought us to a high wooden gate, which opened into a gloomy avenue of chestnuts.
The curved and shadowed drive led us to a low, dark house, pitch-black against a slate-coloured sky. From the front window upon the left of the door there peeped a glimmer of a feeble light.
"There's a constable in possession," said Baynes. "I'll knock at the window." He stepped across the grass plot and tapped with his hand on the pane.
Through the fogged glass I dimly saw a man spring up from a chair beside the fire, and heard a sharp cry from within the room.
An instant later a white-faced, hard-breathing policeman had opened the door, the candle wavering in his trembling hand.
I am glad you have come, sir. It has been a long evening, and I don't think my nerve is as good as it was.
Well, sir, it's this lonely, silent house and the queer thing in the kitchen. Then when you tapped at the window I thought it had come again.
It was just about two hours ago. The light was just fading. I was sitting reading in the chair. I don't know what made me look up, but there was a face looking in at me through the lower pane.
Then there was the size of it-it was twice yours, sir. And the look of it-the great staring goggle eyes, and the line of white teeth like a hungry beast.
I tell you, sir, I couldn't move a finger, nor get my breath, till it whisked away and was gone. Out I ran and through the shrubbery, but thank God there was no one there.
"That, at least, is very easily settled," said Holmes, lighting his little pocket lantern. "Yes," he reported, after a short examination of the grass bed, "a number twelve shoe, I should say.
"Well," said the inspector with a grave and thoughtful face, "whoever he may have been, and whatever he may have wanted, he's gone for the present, and we have more immediate things to attend to.
Odds and ends, some pipes, a few novels, two of them in Spanish, an old-fashioned pinfire revolver, and a guitar were among the personal property.
"Nothing in all this," said Baynes, stalking, candle in hand, from room to room. "But now, Mr. Holmes, I invite your attention to the kitchen."
It was a gloomy, high-ceilinged room at the back of the house, with a straw litter in one corner, which served apparently as a bed for the cook.
He held up his candle before an extraordinary object which stood at the back of the dresser. It was so wrinkled and shrunken and withered that it was difficult to say what it might have been.
One could but say that it was black and leathery and that it bore some resemblance to a dwarfish, human figure.
At first, as I examined it, I thought that it was a mummified negro baby, and then it seemed a very twisted and ancient monkey.
Finally I was left in doubt as to whether it was animal or human. A double band of white shells were strung round the centre of it.
"Very interesting-very interesting, indeed!" said Holmes, peering at this sinister relic. "Anything more?"
In silence Baynes led the way to the sink and held forward his candle. The limbs and body of some large, white bird, torn savagely to pieces with the feathers still on, were littered all over it.
But Mr. Baynes had kept his most sinister exhibit to the last. From under the sink he drew a zinc pail which contained a quantity of blood.
Something has been killed and something has been burned. We raked all these out of the fire. We had a doctor in this morning.
I must congratulate you, Inspector, on handling so distinctive and instructive a case. Your powers, if I may say so without offence, seem superior to your opportunities.
You're right, Mr. Holmes. We stagnate in the provinces. A case of this sort gives a man a chance, and I hope that I shall take it.
Yes, sir, there must have been some very strange people with some very strange ways in this house. One of them is dead.
Did his companions follow him and kill him? If they did we should have them, for every port is watched.
And I'll work it myself, Mr. Holmes. It's only due to my own credit to do so. Your name is made, but I have still to make mine.
"Well, well, Inspector," said he. "Do you follow your path and I will follow mine. My results are always very much at your service if you care to apply to me for them.
I think that I have seen all that I wish in this house, and that my time may be more profitably employed elsewhere.
I could tell by numerous subtle signs, which might have been lost upon anyone but myself, that Holmes was on a hot scent.
As impassive as ever to the casual observer, there were none the less a subdued eagerness and suggestion of tension in his brightened eyes and brisker manner which assured me that the game was afoot.
I waited, therefore-but to my ever-deepening disappointment I waited in vain. Day succeeded day, and my friend took no step forward.
One morning he spent in town, and I learned from a casual reference that he had visited the British Museum.
Save for this one excursion, he spent his days in long and often solitary walks, or in chatting with a number of village gossips whose acquaintance he had cultivated.
"I'm sure, Watson, a week in the country will be invaluable to you," he remarked. "It is very pleasant to see the first green shoots upon the hedges and the catkins on the hazels once again.
With a spud, a tin box, and an elementary book on botany, there are instructive days to be spent." He prowled about with this equipment himself, but it was a poor show of plants which he would bring back of an evening.
Occasionally in our rambles we came across Inspector Baynes. His fat, red face wreathed itself in smiles and his small eyes glittered as he greeted my companion.
He said little about the case, but from that little we gathered that he also was not dissatisfied at the course of events.
I must admit, however, that I was somewhat surprised when, some five days after the crime, I opened my morning paper to find in large letters:
Great excitement was caused in Esher and the neighbouring district when it was learned late last night that an arrest had been effected in connection with the Oxshott murder.
It was suggested, but never proved, that the deceased gentleman may have had valuables in the house, and that their abstraction was the motive of the crime.
This man has been seen since the crime, for he was detected and pursued by Constable Walters on the same evening, when he had the audacity to revisit Wisteria Lodge.
Inspector Baynes, considering that such a visit must have some purpose in view and was likely, therefore, to be repeated, abandoned the house but left an ambuscade in the shrubbery.
The man walked into the trap and was captured last night after a struggle in which Constable Downing was badly bitten by the savage.
We understand that when the prisoner is brought before the magistrates a remand will be applied for by the police, and that great developments are hoped from his capture.
"Really we must see Baynes at once," cried Holmes, picking up his hat. "We will just catch him before he starts."
We hurried down the village street and found, as we had expected, that the inspector was just leaving his lodgings.
I have looked into this case with some care, and I am not convinced that you are on the right lines. I don't want you to commit yourself too far unless you are sure.
It seemed to me that something like a wink quivered for an instant over one of Mr. Baynes's tiny eyes.
No, sir; I believe you mean well by me. But we all have our own systems, Mr. Holmes. You have yours, and maybe I have mine.
You're welcome always to my news. This fellow is a perfect savage, as strong as a cart-horse and as fierce as the devil.
He chewed Downing's thumb nearly off before they could master him. He hardly speaks a word of English, and we can get nothing out of him but grunts.
I didn't say so, Mr. Holmes; I didn't say so. We all have our little ways. You try yours and I will try mine.
Holmes shrugged his shoulders as we walked away together. "I can't make the man out. He seems to be riding for a fall.
Well, as he says, we must each try our own way and see what comes of it. But there's something in Inspector Baynes which I can't quite understand.
We can now see a reason for the disappearance of Garcia's household. They were all confederates in the same unknown crime.
If it came off when Garcia returned, any possible suspicion would be warded off by the Englishman's evidence, and all would be well.
But the attempt was a dangerous one, and if Garcia did not return by a certain hour it was probable that his own life had been sacrificed.
The whole inexplicable tangle seemed to straighten out before me. I wondered, as I always did, how it had not been obvious to me before.
We can imagine that in the confusion of flight something precious, something which he could not bear to part with, had been left behind.
You will appreciate the difficulty of the situation, Watson. There is nothing upon which we can apply for a warrant.
Our whole scheme might seem fantastic if laid before a magistrate. The woman's disappearance counts for nothing, since in that extraordinary household any member of it might be invisible for a week.
And yet she may at the present moment be in danger of her life. All I can do is to watch the house and leave my agent, Warner, on guard at the gates.
I know which is her room. It is accessible from the top of an outhouse. My suggestion is that you and I go to-night and see if we can strike at the very heart of the mystery.
But there was something in the ice-cold reasoning of Holmes which made it impossible to shrink from any adventure which he might recommend.
One knew that thus, and only thus, could a solution be found. I clasped his hand in silence, and the die was cast.
But it was not destined that our investigation should have so adventurous an ending. It was about five o'clock, and the shadows of the March evening were beginning to fall, when an excited rustic rushed into our room.
They've gone, Mr. Holmes. They went by the last train. The lady broke away, and I've got her in a cab downstairs.
In the cab was a woman, half-collapsed from nervous exhaustion. She bore upon her aquiline and emaciated face the traces of some recent tragedy.
Her head hung listlessly upon her breast, but as she raised it and turned her dull eyes upon us I saw that her pupils were dark dots in the centre of the broad grey iris.
"I watched at the gate, same as you advised, Mr. Holmes," said our emissary, the discharged gardener.
When the carriage came out I followed it to the station. She was like one walking in her sleep, but when they tried to get her into the train she came to life and struggled.
They pushed her into the carriage. She fought her way out again. I took her part, got her into a cab, and here we are.
I shan't forget the face at the carriage window as I led her away. I'd have a short life if he had his way-the black-eyed, scowling, yellow devil.
We carried her upstairs, laid her on the sofa, and a couple of cups of the strongest coffee soon cleared her brain from the mists of the drug.
"Why, sir, you've got me the very evidence I want," said the inspector warmly, shaking my friend by the hand.
Why, Mr. Holmes, when you were crawling in the shrubbery at High Gable I was up one of the trees in the plantation and saw you down below.
I was sure Henderson, as he calls himself, felt that he was suspected, and that he would lie low and make no move so long as he thought he was in any danger.
I arrested the wrong man to make him believe that our eyes were off him. I knew he would be likely to clear off then and give us a chance of getting at Miss Burnet.
I've had a plain-clothes man waiting at the station all the week. Wherever the High Gable folk go he will keep them in sight.
But he must have been hard put to it when Miss Burnet broke away. However, your man picked her up, and it all ends well.
"Every minute she gets stronger," said Holmes, glancing at the governess. "But tell me, Baynes, who is this man Henderson?"
Strong, fearless, and energetic, he had sufficient virtue to enable him to impose his odious vices upon a cowering people for ten or twelve years.
His name was a terror through all Central America. At the end of that time there was a universal rising against him.
But he was as cunning as he was cruel, and at the first whisper of coming trouble he had secretly conveyed his treasures aboard a ship which was manned by devoted adherents.
It was an empty palace which was stormed by the insurgents next day. The dictator, his two children, his secretary, and his wealth had all escaped them.
From that moment he had vanished from the world, and his identity had been a frequent subject for comment in the European press.
"Yes, sir, Don Murillo, the Tiger of San Pedro," said Baynes. "If you look it up you will find that the San Pedro colours are green and white, same as in the note, Mr. Holmes.
Henderson he called himself, but I traced him back, Paris and Rome and Madrid to Barcelona, where his ship came in in '86.
They've been looking for him all the time for their revenge, but it is only now that they have begun to find him out.
"They discovered him a year ago," said Miss Burnet, who had sat up and was now intently following the conversation.
Once already his life has been attempted, but some evil spirit shielded him. Now, again, it is the noble, chivalrous Garcia who has fallen, while the monster goes safe.
But another will come, and yet another, until some day justice will be done; that is as certain as the rise of to-morrow's sun.
"But how come you into this matter, Miss Burnet?" asked Holmes. "How can an English lady join in such a murderous affair?"
To you they are like crimes committed in some other planet. But we know. We have learned the truth in sorrow and in suffering.
To us there is no fiend in hell like Juan Murillo, and no peace in life while his victims still cry for vengeance.
"No doubt," said Holmes, "he was as you say. I have heard that he was atrocious. But how are you affected?"
All would now have been well for them had it not been for my knowledge of what they had done. I have no doubt that there were times when my life hung in the balance.
For five days this cruel imprisonment continued, with hardly enough food to hold body and soul together.
This afternoon a good lunch was brought me, but the moment after I took it I knew that I had been drugged.
In a sort of dream I remember being half-led, half-carried to the carriage; in the same state I was conveyed to the train.
Only then, when the wheels were almost moving, did I suddenly realise that my liberty lay in my own hands.
I sprang out, they tried to drag me back, and had it not been for the help of this good man, who led me to the cab, I should never had broken away.
"Our difficulties are not over," he remarked, shaking his head. "Our police work ends, but our legal work begins."
"Exactly," said I. "A plausible lawyer could make it out as an act of self-defence. There may be a hundred crimes in the background, but it is only on this one that they can be tried."
No, no, we shall all be justified when we see the tenants of High Gable at the next Guildford Assizes.
It is a matter of history, however, that a little time was still to elapse before the Tiger of San Pedro should meet with his deserts.
Wily and bold, he and his companion threw their pursuer off their track by entering a lodging-house in Edmonton Street and leaving by the back-gate into Curzon Square.
"A chaotic case, my dear Watson," said Holmes over an evening pipe. "It will not be possible for you to present in that compact form which is dear to your heart.
I think that the strange creature in the kitchen may account for it. The man was a primitive savage from the backwoods of San Pedro, and this was his fetish.
When his companion and he had fled to some prearranged retreat-already occupied, no doubt by a confederate-the companion had persuaded him to leave so compromising an article of furniture.
But the mulatto's heart was with it, and he was driven back to it next day, when, on reconnoitering through the window, he found policeman Walters in possession.
"So you see our savage friend was very orthodox in his ritual. It is grotesque, Watson," Holmes added, as he slowly fastened his notebook, "but, as I have had occasion to remark, there is but one step from the grotesque to the horrible."
He paced restlessly about our sitting-room in a fever of suppressed energy, biting his nails, tapping the furniture, and chafing against inaction.
I could see nothing recorded in the shape of crime which was not commonplace and futile. Holmes groaned and resumed his restless meanderings.
"The London criminal is certainly a dull fellow," said he in the querulous voice of the sportsman whose game has failed him.
Look out this window, Watson. See how the figures loom up, are dimly seen, and then blend once more into the cloud-bank.
The thief or the murderer could roam London on such a day as the tiger does the jungle, unseen until he pounces, and then evident only to his victim.
"This great and sombre stage is set for something more worthy than that," said he. "It is fortunate for this community that I am not a criminal."
Suppose that I were Brooks or Woodhouse, or any of the fifty men who have good reason for taking my life, how long could I survive against my own pursuit?
A summons, a bogus appointment, and all would be over. It is well they don't have days of fog in the Latin countries-the countries of assassination.
Why not? It is as if you met a tram-car coming down a country lane. Mycroft has his rails and he runs on them.
His Pall Mall lodgings, the Diogenes Club, Whitehall-that is his cycle. Once, and only once, he has been here.
It recalls nothing to my mind. But that Mycroft should break out in this erratic fashion! A planet might as well leave its orbit.
I had some vague recollection of an explanation at the time of the Adventure of the Greek Interpreter.
I did not know you quite so well in those days. One has to be discreet when one talks of high matters of state.
You are right in thinking that he is under the British government. You would also be right in a sense if you said that occasionally he is the British government.
I thought I might surprise you. Mycroft draws four hundred and fifty pounds a year, remains a subordinate, has no ambitions of any kind, will receive neither honour nor title, but remains the most indispensable man in the country.
Well, his position is unique. He has made it for himself. There has never been anything like it before, nor will be again.
He has the tidiest and most orderly brain, with the greatest capacity for storing facts, of any man living.
The same great powers which I have turned to the detection of crime he has used for this particular business.
The conclusions of every department are passed to him, and he is the central exchange, the clearinghouse, which makes out the balance.
They began by using him as a short-cut, a convenience; now he has made himself an essential. In that great brain of his everything is pigeon-holed and can be handed out in an instant.
But Jupiter is descending to-day. What on earth can it mean? Who is Cadogan West, and what is he to Mycroft?
"I have it," I cried, and plunged among the litter of papers upon the sofa. "Yes, yes, here he is, sure enough!
This must be serious, Watson. A death which has caused my brother to alter his habits can be no ordinary one.
What in the world can he have to do with it? The case was featureless as I remember it. The young man had apparently fallen out of the train and killed himself.
"There has been an inquest," said I, "and a good many fresh facts have come out. Looked at more closely, I should certainly say that it was a curious case."
"Judging by its effect upon my brother, I should think it must be a most extraordinary one." He snuggled down in his armchair.
The man's name was Arthur Cadogan West. He was twenty-seven years of age, unmarried, and a clerk at Woolwich Arsenal.
There was no quarrel between them and she can give no motive for his action. The next thing heard of him was when his dead body was discovered by a plate-layer named Mason, just outside Aldgate Station on the Underground system in London.
The head was badly crushed-an injury which might well have been caused by a fall from the train. The body could only have come on the line in that way.
Had it been carried down from any neighbouring street, it must have passed the station barriers, where a collector is always standing.
Very good. The case is definite enough. The man, dead or alive, either fell or was precipitated from a train.
The trains which traverse the lines of rail beside which the body was found are those which run from west to east, some being purely Metropolitan, and some from Willesden and outlying junctions.
It can be stated for certain that this young man, when he met his death, was travelling in this direction at some late hour of the night, but at what point he entered the train it is impossible to state.
No ticket! Dear me, Watson, this is really very singular. According to my experience it is not possible to reach the platform of a Metropolitan train without exhibiting one's ticket.
Presumably, then, the young man had one. Was it taken from him in order to conceal the station from which he came?
It is possible. Or did he drop it in the carriage? That is also possible. But the point is of curious interest.
Apparently not. There is a list here of his possessions. His purse contained two pounds fifteen. He had also a check-book on the Woolwich branch of the Capital and Counties Bank.
Through this his identity was established. There were also two dress-circle tickets for the Woolwich Theatre, dated for that very evening.
There we have it at last, Watson! British government-Woolwich. Arsenal-technical papers-Brother Mycroft, the chain is complete.
A moment later the tall and portly form of Mycroft Holmes was ushered into the room. Heavily built and massive, there was a suggestion of uncouth physical inertia in the figure, but above this unwieldy frame there was perched a head so masterful in its brow, so alert in its steel-grey, deep-set eyes, so firm in its lips, and so subtle in its play of expression, that after the first glance one forgot the gross body and remembered only the dominant mind.
At his heels came our old friend Lestrade, of Scotland Yard-thin and austere. The gravity of both their faces foretold some weighty quest.
The detective shook hands without a word. Mycroft Holmes struggled out of his overcoat and subsided into an armchair.
"A most annoying business, Sherlock," said he. "I extremely dislike altering my habits, but the powers that be would take no denial.
In the present state of Siam it is most awkward that I should be away from the office. But it is a real crisis.
I have never seen the Prime Minister so upset. As to the Admiralty-it is buzzing like an overturned bee-hive.
Ah, there's the point! Fortunately, it has not come out. The press would be furious if it did. The papers which this wretched youth had in his pocket were the plans of the Bruce-Partington submarine.
Mycroft Holmes spoke with a solemnity which showed his sense of the importance of the subject. His brother and I sat expectant.
Its importance can hardly be exaggerated. It has been the most jealously guarded of all government secrets.
You may take it from me that naval warfare becomes impossible within the radius of a Bruce-Partington's operation.
Two years ago a very large sum was smuggled through the Estimates and was expended in acquiring a monopoly of the invention.
And yet here we find them in the pocket of a dead junior clerk in the heart of London. From an official point of view it's simply awful.
No, Sherlock, no! That's the pinch. We have not. Ten papers were taken from Woolwich. There were seven in the pocket of Cadogan West.
The three most essential are gone-stolen, vanished. You must drop everything, Sherlock. Never mind your usual petty puzzles of the police-court.
Possibly, Sherlock. But it is a question of getting details. Give me your details, and from an armchair I will return you an excellent expert opinion.
No, you are the one man who can clear the matter up. If you have a fancy to see your name in the next honours list-
"I play the game for the game's own sake," said he. "But the problem certainly presents some points of interest, and I shall be very pleased to look into it.
I have jotted down the more essential ones upon this sheet of paper, together with a few addresses which you will find of service.
The actual official guardian of the papers is the famous government expert, Sir James Walter, whose decorations and sub-titles fill two lines of a book of reference.
He has grown grey in the service, is a gentleman, a favoured guest in the most exalted houses, and, above all, a man whose patriotism is beyond suspicion.
He was at the house of Admiral Sinclair at Barclay Square during the whole of the evening when this incident occurred.
Yes; his brother, Colonel Valentine Walter, has testified to his departure from Woolwich, and Admiral Sinclair to his arrival in London; so Sir James is no longer a direct factor in the problem.
The senior clerk and draughtsman, Mr. Sidney Johnson. He is a man of forty, married, with five children.
He is a silent, morose man, but he has, on the whole, an excellent record in the public service. He is unpopular with his colleagues, but a hard worker.
According to his own account, corroborated only by the word of his wife, he was at home the whole of Monday evening after office hours, and his key has never left the watch-chain upon which it hangs.
He has been ten years in the service and has done good work. He has the reputation of being hot-headed and imperious, but a straight, honest man.
We have nothing against him. He was next Sidney Johnson in the office. His duties brought him into daily, personal contact with the plans.
Well, it is surely perfectly clear who took them away. They are actually found upon the person of this junior clerk, Cadogan West.
Then we must take that as our working hypothesis. Young West took the papers. Now this could only be done by having a false key-
He had, then, several false keys. He took the papers to London to sell the secret, intending, no doubt, to have the plans themselves back in the safe next morning before they were missed.
We will suppose that he was travelling back to Woolwich when he was killed and thrown out of the compartment.
Aldgate, where the body was found, is considerably past the station London Bridge, which would be his route to Woolwich.
Many circumstances could be imagined under which he would pass London Bridge. There was someone in the carriage, for example, with whom he was having an absorbing interview.
This interview led to a violent scene in which he lost his life. Possibly he tried to leave the carriage, fell out on the line, and so met his end.
No better explanation can be given with our present knowledge; and yet consider, Sherlock, how much you leave untouched.
We will suppose, for argument's sake, that young Cadogan West had determined to convey these papers to London.
A very singular one. That is objection No. 1. Objection No. 2: We will suppose that he reaches London and sees the foreign agent.
He must bring back the papers before morning or the loss will be discovered. He took away ten. Only seven were in his pocket.
What had become of the other three? He certainly would not leave them of his own free will. Then, again, where is the price of his treason?
"It seems to me perfectly clear," said Lestrade. "I have no doubt at all as to what occurred. He took the papers to sell them.
He saw the agent. They could not agree as to price. He started home again, but the agent went with him.
In the train the agent murdered him, took the more essential papers, and threw his body from the carriage.
The ticket would have shown which station was nearest the agent's house. Therefore he took it from the murdered man's pocket.
"Good, Lestrade, very good," said Holmes. "Your theory holds together. But if this is true, then the case is at an end.
On the one hand, the traitor is dead. On the other, the plans of the Bruce-Partington submarine are presumably already on the Continent.
"To act, Sherlock-to act!" cried Mycroft, springing to his feet. "All my instincts are against this explanation.
Use your powers! Go to the scene of the crime! See the people concerned! Leave no stone unturned! In all your career you have never had so great a chance of serving your country.
"Well, well!" said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "Come, Watson! And you, Lestrade, could you favour us with your company for an hour or two?
We will begin our investigation by a visit to Aldgate Station. Good-bye, Mycroft. I shall let you have a report before evening, but I warn you in advance that you have little to expect.
An hour later Holmes, Lestrade and I stood upon the Underground railroad at the point where it emerges from the tunnel immediately before Aldgate Station.
"This is where the young man's body lay," said he, indicating a spot about three feet from the metals.
It could not have fallen from above, for these, as you see, are all blank walls. Therefore, it could only have come from a train, and that train, so far as we can trace it, must have passed about midnight on Monday.
There was dense fog, however, and nothing could be seen. He made no report of it at the time. Why, whatever is the matter with Mr.
My friend was standing with an expression of strained intensity upon his face, staring at the railway metals where they curved out of the tunnel.
Aldgate is a junction, and there was a network of points. On these his eager, questioning eyes were fixed, and I saw on his keen, alert face that tightening of the lips, that quiver of the nostrils, and concentration of the heavy, tufted brows which I knew so well.
An idea-an indication, no more. But the case certainly grows in interest. Unique, perfectly unique, and yet why not?
And yet one would have expected some bleeding. Would it be possible for me to inspect the train which contained the passenger who heard the thud of a fall in the fog?
"I can assure you, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, "that every carriage has been carefully examined. I saw to it myself."
It was one of my friend's most obvious weaknesses that he was impatient with less alert intelligences than his own.
"Very likely," said he, turning away. "As it happens, it was not the carriages which I desired to examine.
Watson, we have done all we can here. We need not trouble you any further, Mr. Lestrade. I think our investigations must now carry us to Woolwich.
At London Bridge, Holmes wrote a telegram to his brother, which he handed to me before dispatching it.
See some light in the darkness, but it may possibly flicker out. Meanwhile, please send by messenger, to await return at Baker Street, a complete list of all foreign spies or international agents known to be in England, with full address.-Sherlock.
"That should be helpful, Watson," he remarked as we took our seats in the Woolwich train. "We certainly owe Brother Mycroft a debt for having introduced us to what promises to be a really very remarkable case."
His eager face still wore that expression of intense and high-strung energy, which showed me that some novel and suggestive circumstance had opened up a stimulating line of thought.
He was a different man from the limp and lounging figure in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown who had prowled so restlessly only a few hours before round the fog-girt room.
"There is material here. There is scope," said he. "I am dull indeed not to have understood its possibilities."
The end is dark to me also, but I have hold of one idea which may lead us far. The man met his death elsewhere, and his body was on the roof of a carriage.
Remarkable, is it not? But consider the facts. Is it a coincidence that it is found at the very point where the train pitches and sways as it comes round on the points?
Is not that the place where an object upon the roof might be expected to fall off? The points would affect no object inside the train.
Either the body fell from the roof, or a very curious coincidence has occurred. But now consider the question of the blood.
Of course, there was no bleeding on the line if the body had bled elsewhere. Each fact is suggestive in itself.
Exactly. We could not explain the absence of a ticket. This would explain it. Everything fits together.
But suppose it were so, we are still as far as ever from unravelling the mystery of his death. Indeed, it becomes not simpler but stranger.
"Perhaps," said Holmes, thoughtfully, "perhaps." He relapsed into a silent reverie, which lasted until the slow train drew up at last in Woolwich Station.
"We have quite a little round of afternoon calls to make," said he. "I think that Sir James Walter claims our first attention."
The house of the famous official was a fine villa with green lawns stretching down to the Thames. As we reached it the fog was lifting, and a thin, watery sunshine was breaking through.
We were ushered into a dim-lit drawing-room, where an instant later we were joined by a very tall, handsome, light-bearded man of fifty, the younger brother of the dead scientist.
His wild eyes, stained cheeks, and unkempt hair all spoke of the sudden blow which had fallen upon the household.
"It was this horrible scandal," said he. "My brother, Sir James, was a man of very sensitive honour, and he could not survive such an affair.
It broke his heart. He was always so proud of the efficiency of his department, and this was a crushing blow.
We had hoped that he might have given us some indications which would have helped us to clear the matter up.
I assure you that it was all a mystery to him as it is to you and to all of us. He had already put all his knowledge at the disposal of the police.
I know nothing myself save what I have read or heard. I have no desire to be discourteous, but you can understand, Mr. Holmes, that we are much disturbed at present, and I must ask you to hasten this interview to an end.
"This is indeed an unexpected development," said my friend when we had regained the cab. "I wonder if the death was natural, or whether the poor old fellow killed himself!
If the latter, may it be taken as some sign of self-reproach for duty neglected? We must leave that question to the future.
"I cannot explain it, Mr. Holmes," she said. "I have not shut an eye since the tragedy, thinking, thinking, thinking, night and day, what the true meaning of it can be.
Arthur was the most single-minded, chivalrous, patriotic man upon earth. He would have cut his right hand off before he would sell a State secret confided to his keeping.
No; his needs were very simple and his salary ample. He had saved a few hundreds, and we were to marry at the New Year.
Only for the last week or so. He was thoughtful and worried. Once I pressed him about it. He admitted that there was something, and that it was concerned with his official life.
Go on, Miss Westbury. Even if it seems to tell against him, go on. We cannot say what it may lead to.
Indeed, I have nothing more to tell. Once or twice it seemed to me that he was on the point of telling me something.
He spoke one evening of the importance of the secret, and I have some recollection that he said that no doubt foreign spies would pay a great deal to have it.
We were to go to the theatre. The fog was so thick that a cab was useless. We walked, and our way took us close to the office.
He gave an exclamation; that was all. I waited but he never returned. Then I walked home. Next morning, after the office opened, they came to inquire.
About twelve o'clock we heard the terrible news. Oh, Mr. Holmes, if you could only, only save his honour!
"It was black enough before against this young man, but our inquiries make it blacker," he remarked as the cab lumbered off.
His coming marriage gives a motive for the crime. He naturally wanted money. The idea was in his head, since he spoke about it.
But surely, Holmes, character goes for something? Then, again, why should he leave the girl in the street and dart away to commit a felony?
Mr. Sidney Johnson, the senior clerk, met us at the office and received us with that respect which my companion's card always commanded.
He was a thin, gruff, bespectacled man of middle age, his cheeks haggard, and his hands twitching from the nervous strain to which he had been subjected.
The place is disorganised. The chief dead, Cadogan West dead, our papers stolen. And yet, when we closed our door on Monday evening, we were as efficient an office as any in the government service.
There is, but he has other departments to look after as well. He is an old soldier and a most trustworthy man.
Suppose that Cadogan West wished to make his way into the building after hours; he would need three keys, would he not, before he could reach the papers?
Yes, I think he was. I know that so far as those three keys are concerned he kept them on the same ring.
Then West, if he is the culprit, must have had a duplicate. And yet none was found upon his body. One other point: if a clerk in this office desired to sell the plans, would it not be simpler to copy the plans for himself than to take the originals, as was actually done?
No doubt we had, but I beg you won't try to drag me into the matter, Mr. Holmes. What is the use of our speculating in this way when the original plans were actually found on West?
Well, it is certainly singular that he should run the risk of taking originals if he could safely have taken copies, which would have equally served his turn.
Every inquiry in this case reveals something inexplicable. Now there are three papers still missing. They are, as I understand, the vital ones.
Do you mean to say that anyone holding these three papers, and without the seven others, could construct a Bruce-Partington submarine?
I reported to that effect to the Admiralty. But to-day I have been over the drawings again, and I am not so sure of it.
The double valves with the automatic self-adjusting slots are drawn in one of the papers which have been returned.
Until the foreigners had invented that for themselves they could not make the boat. Of course they might soon get over the difficulty.
I think, with your permission, I will now take a stroll round the premises. I do not recall any other question which I desired to ask.
He examined the lock of the safe, the door of the room, and finally the iron shutters of the window. It was only when we were on the lawn outside that his interest was strongly excited.
There was a laurel bush outside the window, and several of the branches bore signs of having been twisted or snapped.
He examined them carefully with his lens, and then some dim and vague marks upon the earth beneath. Finally he asked the chief clerk to close the iron shutters, and he pointed out to me that they hardly met in the centre, and that it would be possible for anyone outside to see what was going on within the room.
The indications are ruined by three days' delay. They may mean something or nothing. Well, Watson, I do not think that Woolwich can help us further.
He was alone and took a single third-class ticket. The clerk was struck at the time by his excited and nervous manner.
So shaky was he that he could hardly pick up his change, and the clerk had helped him with it. A reference to the timetable showed that the 8:15 was the first train which it was possible for West to take after he had left the lady about 7:30.
The effect of our inquiries at Woolwich has in the main been against young Cadogan West; but the indications at the window would lend themselves to a more favourable hypothesis.
Very good. We will now suppose that as he went to the theatre with the young lady he suddenly, in the fog, caught a glimpse of this same agent going in the direction of the office.
He was an impetuous man, quick in his decisions. Everything gave way to his duty. He followed the man, reached the window, saw the abstraction of the documents, and pursued the thief.
In this way we get over the objection that no one would take originals when he could make copies. This outsider had to take originals.
Then we come into difficulties. One would imagine that under such circumstances the first act of young Cadogan West would be to seize the villain and raise the alarm.
Why did he not do so? Could it have been an official superior who took the papers? That would explain West's conduct.
Or could the chief have given West the slip in the fog, and West started at once to London to head him off from his own rooms, presuming that he knew where the rooms were?
The call must have been very pressing, since he left his girl standing in the fog and made no effort to communicate with her.
Our scent runs cold here, and there is a vast gap between either hypothesis and the laying of West's body, with seven papers in his pocket, on the roof of a Metropolitan train.
My instinct now is to work from the other end. If Mycroft has given us the list of addresses we may be able to pick our man and follow two tracks instead of one.
Surely enough, a note awaited us at Baker Street. A government messenger had brought it post-haste. Holmes glanced at it and threw it over to me.
The latter was known to be in town on Monday and is now reported as having left. Glad to hear you have seen some light.
The Cabinet awaits your final report with the utmost anxiety. Urgent representations have arrived from the very highest quarter.
"I'm afraid," said Holmes, smiling, "that all the Queen's horses and all the Queen's men cannot avail in this matter."
He had spread out his big map of London and leaned eagerly over it. "Well, well," said he presently with an exclamation of satisfaction, "things are turning a little in our direction at last.
Why, Watson, I do honestly believe that we are going to pull it off, after all." He slapped me on the shoulder with a sudden burst of hilarity.
I am going out now. It is only a reconnaissance. I will do nothing serious without my trusted comrade and biographer at my elbow.
Do you stay here, and the odds are that you will see me again in an hour or two. If time hangs heavy get foolscap and a pen, and begin your narrative of how we saved the State.
I felt some reflection of his elation in my own mind, for I knew well that he would not depart so far from his usual austerity of demeanour unless there was good cause for exultation.
All the long November evening I waited, filled with impatience for his return. At last, shortly after nine o'clock, there arrived a messenger with a note:
Am dining at Goldini's Restaurant, Gloucester Road, Kensington. Please come at once and join me there.
It was a nice equipment for a respectable citizen to carry through the dim, fog-draped streets. I stowed them all discreetly away in my overcoat and drove straight to the address given.
Excellent. Let me give you a short sketch of what I have done, with some indication of what we are about to do.
Now it must be evident to you, Watson, that this young man's body was placed on the roof of the train.
That was clear from the instant that I determined the fact that it was from the roof, and not from a carriage, that he had fallen.
I should say it was impossible. If you examine the roofs you will find that they are slightly rounded, and there is no railing round them.
That was the question which we had to answer. There is only one possible way. You are aware that the Underground runs clear of tunnels at some points in the West End.
I had a vague memory that as I have travelled by it I have occasionally seen windows just above my head.
Now, suppose that a train halted under such a window, would there be any difficulty in laying a body upon the roof?
We must fall back upon the old axiom that when all other contingencies fail, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.
Here all other contingencies have failed. When I found that the leading international agent, who had just left London, lived in a row of houses which abutted upon the Underground, I was so pleased that you were a little astonished at my sudden frivolity.
Yes, that was it. Mr. Hugo Oberstein, of 13, Caulfield Gardens, had become my objective. I began my operations at Gloucester Road Station, where a very helpful official walked with me along the track and allowed me to satisfy myself not only that the back-stair windows of Caulfield Gardens open on the line but the even more essential fact that, owing to the intersection of one of the larger railways, the Underground trains are frequently held motionless for some minutes at that very spot.
So far-so far, Watson. We advance, but the goal is afar. Well, having seen the back of Caulfield Gardens, I visited the front and satisfied myself that the bird was indeed flown.
It is a considerable house, unfurnished, so far as I could judge, in the upper rooms. Oberstein lived there with a single valet, who was probably a confederate entirely in his confidence.
My dear fellow, you shall keep watch in the street. I'll do the criminal part. It's not a time to stick at trifles.
Think of Mycroft's note, of the Admiralty, the Cabinet, the exalted person who waits for news. We are bound to go.
"I knew you would not shrink at the last," said he, and for a moment I saw something in his eyes which was nearer to tenderness than I had ever seen.
"It is nearly half a mile, but there is no hurry. Let us walk," said he. "Don't drop the instruments, I beg.
Caulfield Gardens was one of those lines of flat-faced pillared, and porticoed houses which are so prominent a product of the middle Victorian epoch in the West End of London.
Next door there appeared to be a children's party, for the merry buzz of young voices and the clatter of a piano resounded through the night.
The fog still hung about and screened us with its friendly shade. Holmes had lit his lantern and flashed it upon the massive door.
"This is a serious proposition," said he. "It is certainly bolted as well as locked. We would do better in the area.
There is an excellent archway down yonder in case a too zealous policeman should intrude. Give me a hand, Watson, and I'll do the same for you.
A minute later we were both in the area. Hardly had we reached the dark shadows before the step of the policeman was heard in the fog above.
As its soft rhythm died away, Holmes set to work upon the lower door. I saw him stoop and strain until with a sharp crash it flew open.
We sprang through into the dark passage, closing the area door behind us. Holmes led the way up the curving, uncarpeted stair.
"Here we are, Watson-this must be the one." He threw it open, and as he did so there was a low, harsh murmur, growing steadily into a loud roar as a train dashed past us in the darkness.
Holmes swept his light along the window-sill. It was thickly coated with soot from the passing engines, but the black surface was blurred and rubbed in places.
You can see where they rested the body. Halloa, Watson! what is this? There can be no doubt that it is a blood mark.
He was pointing to faint discolorations along the woodwork of the window. "Here it is on the stone of the stair also.
We had not long to wait. The very next train roared from the tunnel as before, but slowed in the open, and then, with a creaking of brakes, pulled up immediately beneath us.
It was not four feet from the window-ledge to the roof of the carriages. Holmes softly closed the window.
I cannot agree with you there. From the moment that I conceived the idea of the body being upon the roof, which surely was not a very abstruse one, all the rest was inevitable.
If it were not for the grave interests involved the affair up to this point would be insignificant. Our difficulties are still before us.
We had ascended the kitchen stair and entered the suite of rooms upon the first floor. One was a dining-room, severely furnished and containing nothing of interest.
A second was a bedroom, which also drew blank. The remaining room appeared more promising, and my companion settled down to a systematic examination.
"The cunning dog has covered his tracks," said he. "He has left nothing to incriminate him. His dangerous correspondence has been destroyed or removed.
The recurring words, "water pressure" and "pressure to the square inch" suggested some possible relation to a submarine.
Holmes tossed them all impatiently aside. There only remained an envelope with some small newspaper slips inside it.
"A fairly complete record, Watson! If we could only get at the man at the other end!" He sat lost in thought, tapping his fingers on the table.
Well, perhaps it won't be so difficult, after all. There is nothing more to be done here, Watson. I think we might drive round to the offices of the _Daily Telegraph_, and so bring a good day's work to a conclusion.
Mycroft Holmes and Lestrade had come round by appointment after breakfast next day and Sherlock Holmes had recounted to them our proceedings of the day before.
"We can't do these things in the force, Mr. Holmes," said he. "No wonder you get results that are beyond us.
For England, home and beauty-eh, Watson? Martyrs on the altar of our country. But what do you think of it, Mycroft?
That was my idea when I put it in. I think if you could both make it convenient to come with us about eight o'clock to Caulfield Gardens we might possibly get a little nearer to a solution.
I remember that during the whole of that memorable day he lost himself in a monograph which he had undertaken upon the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus.
For my own part I had none of this power of detachment, and the day, in consequence, appeared to be interminable.
The great national importance of the issue, the suspense in high quarters, the direct nature of the experiment which we were trying-all combined to work upon my nerve.
It was a relief to me when at last, after a light dinner, we set out upon our expedition. Lestrade and Mycroft met us by appointment at the outside of Gloucester Road Station.
An hour passed and yet another. When eleven struck, the measured beat of the great church clock seemed to sound the dirge of our hopes.
Lestrade and Mycroft were fidgeting in their seats and looking twice a minute at their watches. Holmes sat silent and composed, his eyelids half shut, but every sense on the alert.
There had been a furtive step past the door. Now it returned. We heard a shuffling sound outside, and then two sharp taps with the knocker.
Holmes rose, motioning us to remain seated. The gas in the hall was a mere point of light. He opened the outer door, and then as a dark figure slipped past him he closed and fastened it.
Before our prisoner had recovered his balance the door was shut and Holmes standing with his back against it.
The man glared round him, staggered, and fell senseless upon the floor. With the shock, his broad-brimmed hat flew from his head, his cravat slipped down from his lips, and there were the long light beard and the soft, handsome delicate features of Colonel Valentine Walter.
"You can write me down an ass this time, Watson," said he. "This was not the bird that I was looking for."
The younger brother of the late Sir James Walter, the head of the Submarine Department. Yes, yes; I see the fall of the cards.
We had carried the prostrate body to the sofa. Now our prisoner sat up, looked round him with a horror-stricken face, and passed his hand over his forehead, like one who cannot believe his own senses.
"Everything is known, Colonel Walter," said Holmes. "How an English gentleman could behave in such a manner is beyond my comprehension.
But your whole correspondence and relations with Oberstein are within our knowledge. So also are the circumstances connected with the death of young Cadogan West.
Let me advise you to gain at least the small credit for repentance and confession, since there are still some details which we can only learn from your lips.
We are aware that you went down to the office in the fog on Monday night, but that you were seen and followed by young Cadogan West, who had probably some previous reason to suspect you.
He saw your theft, but could not give the alarm, as it was just possible that you were taking the papers to your brother in London.
Leaving all his private concerns, like the good citizen that he was, he followed you closely in the fog and kept at your heels until you reached this very house.
There he intervened, and then it was, Colonel Walter, that to treason you added the more terrible crime of murder.
I will. I swear to you that I will. I did the rest. I confess it. It was just as you say. A Stock Exchange debt had to be paid.
I needed the money badly. Oberstein offered me five thousand. It was to save myself from ruin. But as to murder, I am as innocent as you.
He had his suspicions before, and he followed me as you describe. I never knew it until I was at the very door.
It was thick fog, and one could not see three yards. I had given two taps and Oberstein had come to the door.
The young man rushed up and demanded to know what we were about to do with the papers. Oberstein had a short life-preserver.
He always carried it with him. As West forced his way after us into the house Oberstein struck him on the head.
The blow was a fatal one. He was dead within five minutes. There he lay in the hall, and we were at our wits' end what to do.
Then Oberstein had this idea about the trains which halted under his back window. But first he examined the papers which I had brought.
He said that three of them were essential, and that he must keep them. 'You cannot keep them,' said I.
'There will be a dreadful row at Woolwich if they are not returned.' 'I must keep them,' said he, 'for they are so technical that it is impossible in the time to make copies.'
'Then they must all go back together to-night,' said I. He thought for a little, and then he cried out that he had it.
'Three I will keep,' said he. 'The others we will stuff into the pocket of this young man. When he is found the whole business will assuredly be put to his account.'
I could see no other way out of it, so we did as he suggested. We waited half an hour at the window before a train stopped.
It was so thick that nothing could be seen, and we had no difficulty in lowering West's body on to the train.
He said nothing, but he had caught me once with his keys, and I think that he suspected. I read in his eyes that he suspected.
I will do anything I can. I owe this fellow no particular good-will. He has been my ruin and my downfall.
In his trunk were found the invaluable Bruce-Partington plans, which he had put up for auction in all the naval centres of Europe.
Some weeks afterwards I learned incidentally that my friend spent a day at Windsor, whence he returned with a remarkably fine emerald tie-pin.
When I asked him if he had bought it, he answered that it was a present from a certain gracious lady in whose interests he had once been fortunate enough to carry out a small commission.
He said no more; but I fancy that I could guess at that lady's august name, and I have little doubt that the emerald pin will forever recall to my friend's memory the adventure of the Bruce-Partington plans.
It was indeed this attitude upon the part of my friend and certainly not any lack of interesting material which has caused me of late years to lay very few of my records before the public.
My participation in some of his adventures was always a privilege which entailed discretion and reticence upon me.
I have no idea what backward sweep of memory had brought the matter fresh to his mind, or what freak had caused him to desire that I should recount it; but I hasten, before another cancelling telegram may arrive, to hunt out the notes which give me the exact details of the case and to lay the narrative before my readers.
Thus it was that in the early spring of that year we found ourselves together in a small cottage near Poldhu Bay, at the further extremity of the Cornish peninsula.
With a northerly breeze it lies placid and sheltered, inviting the storm-tossed craft to tack into it for rest and protection.
Then come the sudden swirl round of the wind, the blistering gale from the south-west, the dragging anchor, the lee shore, and the last battle in the creaming breakers.
On the land side our surroundings were as sombre as on the sea. It was a country of rolling moors, lonely and dun-coloured, with an occasional church tower to mark the site of some old-world village.
Many of my readers may retain some recollection of what was called at the time "The Cornish Horror," though a most imperfect account of the matter reached the London press.
I remember that during our short visit we found the vicar garrulous, but his lodger strangely reticent, a sad-faced, introspective man, sitting with averted eyes, brooding apparently upon his own affairs.
These were the two men who entered abruptly into our little sitting-room on Tuesday, March the 16th, shortly after our breakfast hour, as we were smoking together, preparatory to our daily excursion upon the moors.
"Mr. Holmes," said the vicar in an agitated voice, "the most extraordinary and tragic affair has occurred during the night.
It is the most unheard-of business. We can only regard it as a special Providence that you should chance to be here at the time, for in all England you are the one man we need.
I glared at the intrusive vicar with no very friendly eyes; but Holmes took his pipe from his lips and sat up in his chair like an old hound who hears the view-halloa.
He waved his hand to the sofa, and our palpitating visitor with his agitated companion sat side by side upon it.
Mr. Mortimer Tregennis was more self-contained than the clergyman, but the twitching of his thin hands and the brightness of his dark eyes showed that they shared a common emotion.
"Well, as you seem to have made the discovery, whatever it may be, and the vicar to have had it second-hand, perhaps you had better do the speaking," said Holmes.
I glanced at the hastily clad clergyman, with the formally dressed lodger seated beside him, and was amused at the surprise which Holmes's simple deduction had brought to their faces.
He left them shortly after ten o'clock, playing cards round the dining-room table, in excellent health and spirits.
Mr. Mortimer Tregennis naturally went with him. When he arrived at Tredannick Wartha he found an extraordinary state of things.
His two brothers and his sister were seated round the table exactly as he had left them, the cards still spread in front of them and the candles burned down to their sockets.
The sister lay back stone-dead in her chair, while the two brothers sat on each side of her laughing, shouting, and singing, the senses stricken clean out of them.
All three of them, the dead woman and the two demented men, retained upon their faces an expression of the utmost horror-a convulsion of terror which was dreadful to look upon.
There was no sign of the presence of anyone in the house, except Mrs. Porter, the old cook and housekeeper, who declared that she had slept deeply and heard no sound during the night.
Nothing had been stolen or disarranged, and there is absolutely no explanation of what the horror can be which has frightened a woman to death and two strong men out of their senses.
There is the situation, Mr. Holmes, in a nutshell, and if you can help us to clear it up you will have done a great work.
He sat for some little time in silence, absorbed in the strange drama which had broken in upon our peace.
"I will look into this matter," he said at last. "On the face of it, it would appear to be a case of a very exceptional nature.
No, Mr. Holmes. Mr. Tregennis brought back the account to the vicarage, and I at once hurried over with him to consult you.
Then we shall walk over together. But before we start I must ask you a few questions, Mr. Mortimer Tregennis.
The other had been silent all this time, but I had observed that his more controlled excitement was even greater than the obtrusive emotion of the clergyman.
He sat with a pale, drawn face, his anxious gaze fixed upon Holmes, and his thin hands clasped convulsively together.
His pale lips quivered as he listened to the dreadful experience which had befallen his family, and his dark eyes seemed to reflect something of the horror of the scene.
"Ask what you like, Mr. Holmes," said he eagerly. "It is a bad thing to speak of, but I will answer you the truth."
Well, Mr. Holmes, I supped there, as the vicar has said, and my elder brother George proposed a game of whist afterwards.
We sat down about nine o'clock. It was a quarter-past ten when I moved to go. I left them all round the table, as merry as could be.
Mrs. Porter had gone to bed, so I let myself out. I shut the hall door behind me. The window of the room in which they sat was closed, but the blind was not drawn down.
There was no change in door or window this morning, or any reason to think that any stranger had been to the house.
Yet there they sat, driven clean mad with terror, and Brenda lying dead of fright, with her head hanging over the arm of the chair.
"The facts, as you state them, are certainly most remarkable," said Holmes. "I take it that you have no theory yourself which can in any way account for them?"
"It's devilish, Mr. Holmes, devilish!" cried Mortimer Tregennis. "It is not of this world. Something has come into that room which has dashed the light of reason from their minds.
"I fear," said Holmes, "that if the matter is beyond humanity it is certainly beyond me. Yet we must exhaust all natural explanations before we fall back upon such a theory as this.
As to yourself, Mr. Tregennis, I take it you were divided in some way from your family, since they lived together and you had rooms apart?
That is so, Mr. Holmes, though the matter is past and done with. We were a family of tin-miners at Redruth, but we sold our venture to a company, and so retired with enough to keep us.
I won't deny that there was some feeling about the division of the money and it stood between us for a time, but it was all forgiven and forgotten, and we were the best of friends together.
Looking back at the evening which you spent together, does anything stand out in your memory as throwing any possible light upon the tragedy?
"There is one thing that occurs to me," said he at last. "As we sat at the table my back was to the window, and my brother George, he being my partner at cards, was facing it.
I couldn't even say if it was man or animal, but I just thought there was something there. When I asked him what he was looking at, he told me that he had the same feeling.
I am an early riser and generally take a walk before breakfast. This morning I had hardly started when the doctor in his carriage overtook me.
He told me that old Mrs. Porter had sent a boy down with an urgent message. I sprang in beside him and we drove on.
When we got there we looked into that dreadful room. The candles and the fire must have burned out hours before, and they had been sitting there in the dark until dawn had broken.
The doctor said Brenda must have been dead at least six hours. There were no signs of violence. She just lay across the arm of the chair with that look on her face.
George and Owen were singing snatches of songs and gibbering like two great apes. Oh, it was awful to see!
I couldn't stand it, and the doctor was as white as a sheet. Indeed, he fell into a chair in a sort of faint, and we nearly had him on our hands as well.
"Remarkable-most remarkable!" said Holmes, rising and taking his hat. "I think, perhaps, we had better go down to Tredannick Wartha without further delay.
Our proceedings of that first morning did little to advance the investigation. It was marked, however, at the outset by an incident which left the most sinister impression upon my mind.
As it drove by us I caught a glimpse through the closed window of a horribly contorted, grinning face glaring out at us.
We looked with horror after the black carriage, lumbering upon its way. Then we turned our steps towards this ill-omened house in which they had met their strange fate.
It was a large and bright dwelling, rather a villa than a cottage, with a considerable garden which was already, in that Cornish air, well filled with spring flowers.
Holmes walked slowly and thoughtfully among the flower-plots and along the path before we entered the porch.
So absorbed was he in his thoughts, I remember, that he stumbled over the watering-pot, upset its contents, and deluged both our feet and the garden path.
Inside the house we were met by the elderly Cornish housekeeper, Mrs. Porter, who, with the aid of a young girl, looked after the wants of the family.
She readily answered all Holmes's questions. She had heard nothing in the night. Her employers had all been in excellent spirits lately, and she had never known them more cheerful and prosperous.
She had fainted with horror upon entering the room in the morning and seeing that dreadful company round the table.
She had, when she recovered, thrown open the window to let the morning air in, and had run down to the lane, whence she sent a farm-lad for the doctor.
The lady was on her bed upstairs if we cared to see her. It took four strong men to get the brothers into the asylum carriage.
She would not herself stay in the house another day and was starting that very afternoon to rejoin her family at St. Ives.
We ascended the stairs and viewed the body. Miss Brenda Tregennis had been a very beautiful girl, though now verging upon middle age.
Her dark, clear-cut face was handsome, even in death, but there still lingered upon it something of that convulsion of horror which had been her last human emotion.
From her bedroom we descended to the sitting-room, where this strange tragedy had actually occurred. The charred ashes of the overnight fire lay in the grate.
On the table were the four guttered and burned-out candles, with the cards scattered over its surface.
He tested how much of the garden was visible; he examined the floor, the ceiling, and the fireplace; but never once did I see that sudden brightening of his eyes and tightening of his lips which would have told me that he saw some gleam of light in this utter darkness.
Mortimer Tregennis explained that the night was cold and damp. For that reason, after his arrival, the fire was lit.
My friend smiled and laid his hand upon my arm. "I think, Watson, that I shall resume that course of tobacco-poisoning which you have so often and so justly condemned," said he.
With your permission, gentlemen, we will now return to our cottage, for I am not aware that any new factor is likely to come to our notice here.
I will turn the facts over in my mind, Mr. Tregennis, and should anything occur to me I will certainly communicate with you and the vicar.
It was not until long after we were back in Poldhu Cottage that Holmes broke his complete and absorbed silence.
He sat coiled in his armchair, his haggard and ascetic face hardly visible amid the blue swirl of his tobacco smoke, his black brows drawn down, his forehead contracted, his eyes vacant and far away.
If, then, Mortimer Tregennis disappeared from the scene, and yet some outside person affected the card-players, how can we reconstruct that person, and how was such an impression of horror conveyed?
The only suggestion in this direction comes from Mortimer Tregennis himself, who says that his brother spoke about some movement in the garden.
Meanwhile, we shall put the case aside until more accurate data are available, and devote the rest of our morning to the pursuit of neolithic man.
It was not until we had returned in the afternoon to our cottage that we found a visitor awaiting us, who soon brought our minds back to the matter in hand.
Neither of us needed to be told who that visitor was. The huge body, the craggy and deeply seamed face with the fierce eyes and hawk-like nose, the grizzled hair which nearly brushed our cottage ceiling, the beard-golden at the fringes and white near the lips, save for the nicotine stain from his perpetual cigar-all these were as well known in London as in Africa, and could only be associated with the tremendous personality of Dr. Leon Sterndale, the great lion-hunter and explorer.
We had heard of his presence in the district and had once or twice caught sight of his tall figure upon the moorland paths.
Here, amid his books and his maps, he lived an absolutely lonely life, attending to his own simple wants and paying little apparent heed to the affairs of his neighbours.
It was a surprise to me, therefore, to hear him asking Holmes in an eager voice whether he had made any advance in his reconstruction of this mysterious episode.
"The county police are utterly at fault," said he, "but perhaps your wider experience has suggested some conceivable explanation.
I may tell you that I had got as far as Plymouth upon my way to Africa, but the news reached me this morning, and I came straight back again to help in the inquiry.
"I have no objection to telling you," he said. "It was Mr. Roundhay, the vicar, who sent me the telegram which recalled me."
"Thank you," said Holmes. "I may say in answer to your original question that I have not cleared my mind entirely on the subject of this case, but that I have every hope of reaching some conclusion.
"Then I have wasted my time and need not prolong my visit." The famous doctor strode out of our cottage in considerable ill-humour, and within five minutes Holmes had followed him.
I saw him no more until the evening, when he returned with a slow step and haggard face which assured me that he had made no great progress with his investigation.
"From the Plymouth hotel, Watson," he said. "I learned the name of it from the vicar, and I wired to make certain that Dr. Leon Sterndale's account was true.
It appears that he did indeed spend last night there, and that he has actually allowed some of his baggage to go on to Africa, while he returned to be present at this investigation.
Deeply interested-yes. There is a thread here which we had not yet grasped and which might lead us through the tangle.
Cheer up, Watson, for I am very sure that our material has not yet all come to hand. When it does we may soon leave our difficulties behind us.
Little did I think how soon the words of Holmes would be realised, or how strange and sinister would be that new development which opened up an entirely fresh line of investigation.
I was shaving at my window in the morning when I heard the rattle of hoofs and, looking up, saw a dog-cart coming at a gallop down the road.
It pulled up at our door, and our friend, the vicar, sprang from it and rushed up our garden path. Holmes was already dressed, and we hastened down to meet him.
Our visitor was so excited that he could hardly articulate, but at last in gasps and bursts his tragic story came out of him.
"We are devil-ridden, Mr. Holmes! My poor parish is devil-ridden!" he cried. "Satan himself is loose in it!
We are given over into his hands!" He danced about in his agitation, a ludicrous object if it were not for his ashy face and startled eyes.
Mr. Mortimer Tregennis died during the night, and with exactly the same symptoms as the rest of his family.
Then, Watson, we will postpone our breakfast. Mr. Roundhay, we are entirely at your disposal. Hurry-hurry, before things get disarranged.
The lodger occupied two rooms at the vicarage, which were in an angle by themselves, the one above the other.
Below was a large sitting-room; above, his bedroom. They looked out upon a croquet lawn which came up to the windows.
We had arrived before the doctor or the police, so that everything was absolutely undisturbed. Let me describe exactly the scene as we saw it upon that misty March morning.
The atmosphere of the room was of a horrible and depressing stuffiness. The servant who had first entered had thrown up the window, or it would have been even more intolerable.
His limbs were convulsed and his fingers contorted as though he had died in a very paroxysm of fear. He was fully clothed, though there were signs that his dressing had been done in a hurry.
We had already learned that his bed had been slept in, and that the tragic end had come to him in the early morning.
One realised the red-hot energy which underlay Holmes's phlegmatic exterior when one saw the sudden change which came over him from the moment that he entered the fatal apartment.
In an instant he was tense and alert, his eyes shining, his face set, his limbs quivering with eager activity.
He was out on the lawn, in through the window, round the room, and up into the bedroom, for all the world like a dashing foxhound drawing a cover.
The lamp, which was an ordinary standard, he examined with minute care, making certain measurements upon its bowl.
Finally, just as the doctor and the official police put in an appearance, he beckoned to the vicar and we all three went out upon the lawn.
Each is suggestive, and together they are almost conclusive. If the police would desire further information I shall be happy to see any of them at the cottage.
This he filled with the same oil as that used at the vicarage, and he carefully timed the period which it would take to be exhausted.
Another experiment which he made was of a more unpleasant nature, and one which I am not likely ever to forget.
"You will remember, Watson," he remarked one afternoon, "that there is a single common point of resemblance in the varying reports which have reached us.
This concerns the effect of the atmosphere of the room in each case upon those who had first entered it.
You will recollect that Mortimer Tregennis, in describing the episode of his last visit to his brother's house, remarked that the doctor on entering the room fell into a chair?
In the second case-that of Mortimer Tregennis himself-you cannot have forgotten the horrible stuffiness of the room when we arrived, though the servant had thrown open the window.
That servant, I found upon inquiry, was so ill that she had gone to her bed. You will admit, Watson, that these facts are very suggestive.
In each case there is evidence of a poisonous atmosphere. In each case, also, there is combustion going on in the room-in the one case a fire, in the other a lamp.
The fire was needed, but the lamp was lit-as a comparison of the oil consumed will show-long after it was broad daylight.
Why? Surely because there is some connection between three things-the burning, the stuffy atmosphere, and, finally, the madness or death of those unfortunate people.
With this train of reasoning in my head I naturally looked about in Mortimer Tregennis's room to find some remains of this substance.
It is not for me, my dear Watson, to stand in the way of the official police force. I leave them all the evidence which I found.
Oh, you will see it out, will you? I thought I knew my Watson. This chair I will place opposite yours, so that we may be the same distance from the poison and face to face.
The door we will leave ajar. Each is now in a position to watch the other and to bring the experiment to an end should the symptoms seem alarming.
Is that all clear? Well, then, I take our powder-or what remains of it-from the envelope, and I lay it above the burning lamp.
They were not long in coming. I had hardly settled in my chair before I was conscious of a thick, musky odour, subtle and nauseous.
A freezing horror took possession of me. I felt that my hair was rising, that my eyes were protruding, that my mouth was opened, and my tongue like leather.
The turmoil within my brain was such that something must surely snap. I tried to scream and was vaguely aware of some hoarse croak which was my own voice, but distant and detached from myself.
Slowly it rose from our souls like the mists from a landscape until peace and reason had returned, and we were sitting upon the grass, wiping our clammy foreheads, and looking with apprehension at each other to mark the last traces of that terrific experience which we had undergone.
"Upon my word, Watson!" said Holmes at last with an unsteady voice, "I owe you both my thanks and an apology.
It was an unjustifiable experiment even for one's self, and doubly so for a friend. I am really very sorry.
"You know," I answered with some emotion, for I have never seen so much of Holmes's heart before, "that it is my greatest joy and privilege to help you."
He relapsed at once into the half-humorous, half-cynical vein which was his habitual attitude to those about him.
"It would be superfluous to drive us mad, my dear Watson," said he. "A candid observer would certainly declare that we were so already before we embarked upon so wild an experiment.
We must give the room a little time to clear. I take it, Watson, that you have no longer a shadow of a doubt as to how these tragedies were produced?
But the cause remains as obscure as before. Come into the arbour here and let us discuss it together.
We must remember, in the first place, that there is some story of a family quarrel, followed by a reconciliation.
Well, in the next place, you will remember that this idea of someone moving in the garden, which took our attention for a moment from the real cause of the tragedy, emanated from him.
He had a motive in misleading us. Finally, if he did not throw the substance into the fire at the moment of leaving the room, who did do so?
The affair happened immediately after his departure. Had anyone else come in, the family would certainly have risen from the table.
Besides, in peaceful Cornwall, visitors did not arrive after ten o'clock at night. We may take it, then, that all the evidence points to Mortimer Tregennis as the culprit.
Ah! he is a little before his time. Perhaps you would kindly step this way, Dr. Leon Sterndale. We have been conducing a chemical experiment indoors which has left our little room hardly fit for the reception of so distinguished a visitor.
I had heard the click of the garden gate, and now the majestic figure of the great African explorer appeared upon the path.
You sent for me, Mr. Holmes. I had your note about an hour ago, and I have come, though I really do not know why I should obey your summons.
"Perhaps we can clear the point up before we separate," said Holmes. "Meanwhile, I am much obliged to you for your courteous acquiescence.
Perhaps, since the matters which we have to discuss will affect you personally in a very intimate fashion, it is as well that we should talk where there can be no eavesdropping.
"I am at a loss to know, sir," he said, "what you can have to speak about which affects me personally in a very intimate fashion."
Then he stopped, and with a violent effort he resumed a cold, rigid calmness, which was, perhaps, more suggestive of danger than his hot-headed outburst.
"I have lived so long among savages and beyond the law," said he, "that I have got into the way of being a law to myself.
Nor have I any desire to do you an injury, Dr. Sterndale. Surely the clearest proof of it is that, knowing what I know, I have sent for you and not for the police.
Sterndale sat down with a gasp, overawed for, perhaps, the first time in his adventurous life. There was a calm assurance of power in Holmes's manner which could not be withstood.
"What do you mean?" he asked at last. "If this is bluff upon your part, Mr. Holmes, you have chosen a bad man for your experiment.
"I will tell you," said Holmes, "and the reason why I tell you is that I hope frankness may beget frankness.
Sterndale mopped his forehead with his handkerchief. "Upon my word, you are getting on," said he. "Do all your successes depend upon this prodigious power of bluff?"
"The bluff," said Holmes sternly, "is upon your side, Dr. Leon Sterndale, and not upon mine. As a proof I will tell you some of the facts upon which my conclusions are based.
Of your return from Plymouth, allowing much of your property to go on to Africa, I will say nothing save that it first informed me that you were one of the factors which had to be taken into account in reconstructing this drama-
I have heard your reasons and regard them as unconvincing and inadequate. We will pass that. You came down here to ask me whom I suspected.
I refused to answer you. You then went to the vicarage, waited outside it for some time, and finally returned to your cottage.
That is what you may expect to see when I follow you. You spent a restless night at your cottage, and you formed certain plans, which in the early morning you proceeded to put into execution.
Leaving your door just as day was breaking, you filled your pocket with some reddish gravel that was lying heaped beside your gate.
You then walked swiftly for the mile which separated you from the vicarage. You were wearing, I may remark, the same pair of ribbed tennis shoes which are at the present moment upon your feet.
At the vicarage you passed through the orchard and the side hedge, coming out under the window of the lodger Tregennis.
It was now daylight, but the household was not yet stirring. You drew some of the gravel from your pocket, and you threw it up at the window above you.
Holmes smiled at the compliment. "It took two, or possibly three, handfuls before the lodger came to the window.
You beckoned him to come down. He dressed hurriedly and descended to his sitting-room. You entered by the window.
There was an interview-a short one-during which you walked up and down the room. Then you passed out and closed the window, standing on the lawn outside smoking a cigar and watching what occurred.
Finally, after the death of Tregennis, you withdrew as you had come. Now, Dr. Sterndale, how do you justify such conduct, and what were the motives for your actions?
If you prevaricate or trifle with me, I give you my assurance that the matter will pass out of my hands forever.
Our visitor's face had turned ashen grey as he listened to the words of his accuser. Now he sat for some time in thought with his face sunk in his hands.
Then with a sudden impulsive gesture he plucked a photograph from his breast-pocket and threw it on the rustic table before us.
"Yes, Brenda Tregennis," repeated our visitor. "For years I have loved her. For years she has loved me.
There is the secret of that Cornish seclusion which people have marvelled at. It has brought me close to the one thing on earth that was dear to me.
I could not marry her, for I have a wife who has left me for years and yet whom, by the deplorable laws of England, I could not divorce.
For years Brenda waited. For years I waited. And this is what we have waited for." A terrible sob shook his great frame, and he clutched his throat under his brindled beard.
The vicar knew. He was in our confidence. He would tell you that she was an angel upon earth. That was why he telegraphed to me and I returned.
What was my baggage or Africa to me when I learned that such a fate had come upon my darling? There you have the missing clue to my action, Mr. Holmes.
Dr. Sterndale drew from his pocket a paper packet and laid it upon the table. On the outside was written "_Radix pedis diaboli_" with a red poison label beneath it.
He pushed it towards me. "I understand that you are a doctor, sir. Have you ever heard of this preparation?"
"It is no reflection upon your professional knowledge," said he, "for I believe that, save for one sample in a laboratory at Buda, there is no other specimen in Europe.
It is used as an ordeal poison by the medicine-men in certain districts of West Africa and is kept as a secret among them.
This particular specimen I obtained under very extraordinary circumstances in the Ubangi country." He opened the paper as he spoke and disclosed a heap of reddish-brown, snuff-like powder.
Now I have told you all. You have yourself supplied the rest. I did, as you say, after a restless night, set off early from my cottage.
I foresaw the difficulty of arousing him, so I gathered some gravel from the pile which you have mentioned, and I used it to throw up to his window.
He came down and admitted me through the window of the sitting-room. I laid his offence before him. I told him that I had come both as judge and executioner.
In five minutes he died. My God! how he died! But my heart was flint, for he endured nothing which my innocent darling had not felt before him.
There is my story, Mr. Holmes. Perhaps, if you loved a woman, you would have done as much yourself. At any rate, I am in your hands.
You can take what steps you like. As I have already said, there is no man living who can fear death less than I do.
Dr. Sterndale raised his giant figure, bowed gravely, and walked from the arbour. Holmes lit his pipe and handed me his pouch.
"Some fumes which are not poisonous would be a welcome change," said he. "I think you must agree, Watson, that it is not a case in which we are called upon to interfere.
Our investigation has been independent, and our action shall be so also. You would not denounce the man?
I have never loved, Watson, but if I did and if the woman I loved had met such an end, I might act even as our lawless lion-hunter has done.
Who knows? Well, Watson, I will not offend your intelligence by explaining what is obvious. The gravel upon the window-sill was, of course, the starting-point of my research.
It was unlike anything in the vicarage garden. Only when my attention had been drawn to Dr. Sterndale and his cottage did I find its counterpart.
The lamp shining in broad daylight and the remains of powder upon the shield were successive links in a fairly obvious chain.
And now, my dear Watson, I think we may dismiss the matter from our mind and go back with a clear conscience to the study of those Chaldean roots which are surely to be traced in the Cornish branch of the great Celtic speech.
Well, Mrs. Warren, I cannot see that you have any particular cause for uneasiness, nor do I understand why I, whose time is of some value, should interfere in the matter.
I really have other things to engage me." So spoke Sherlock Holmes and turned back to the great scrapbook in which he was arranging and indexing some of his recent material.
But he would never cease talking of it-your kindness, sir, and the way in which you brought light into the darkness.
Holmes was accessible upon the side of flattery, and also, to do him justice, upon the side of kindliness.
Well, well, Mrs. Warren, let us hear about it, then. You don't object to tobacco, I take it? Thank you, Watson-the matches!
You are uneasy, as I understand, because your new lodger remains in his rooms and you cannot see him.
My husband is as nervous over it as I am, but he is out at his work all day, while I get no rest from it.
What is he hiding for? What has he done? Except for the girl, I am all alone in the house with him, and it's more than my nerves can stand.
Holmes leaned forward and laid his long, thin fingers upon the woman's shoulder. He had an almost hypnotic power of soothing when he wished.
The scared look faded from her eyes, and her agitated features smoothed into their usual commonplace.
"If I take it up I must understand every detail," said he. "Take time to consider. The smallest point may be the most essential.
He asked my terms, sir. I said fifty shillings a week. There is a small sitting-room and bedroom, and all complete, at the top of the house.
Well, sir, they were that he was to have a key of the house. That was all right. Lodgers often have them.
Not in reason, sir. But this is out of all reason. He has been there for ten days, and neither Mr. Warren, nor I, nor the girl has once set eyes upon him.
We can hear that quick step of his pacing up and down, up and down, night, morning, and noon; but except on that first night he had never once gone out of the house.
Yes, sir, and returned very late-after we were all in bed. He told me after he had taken the rooms that he would do so and asked me not to bar the door.
It was his particular direction that we should always, when he rang, leave his meal upon a chair, outside his door.
Then he rings again when he has finished, and we take it down from the same chair. If he wants anything else he prints it on a slip of paper and leaves it.
Yes, sir; prints it in pencil. Just the word, nothing more. Here's the one I brought to show you-SOAP.
Here's another-MATCH. This is one he left the first morning-DAILY GAZETTE. I leave that paper with his breakfast every morning.
"Dear me, Watson," said Homes, staring with great curiosity at the slips of foolscap which the landlady had handed to him, "this is certainly a little unusual.
Seclusion I can understand; but why print? Printing is a clumsy process. Why not write? What would it suggest, Watson?
But why? What can it matter to him that his landlady should have a word of his writing? Still, it may be as you say.
It opens a pleasing field for intelligent speculation. The words are written with a broad-pointed, violet-tinted pencil of a not unusual pattern.
You will observe that the paper is torn away at the side here after the printing was done, so that the 'S' of 'SOAP' is partly gone.
Exactly. There was evidently some mark, some thumbprint, something which might give a clue to the person's identity.
Well, we don't seem to have much material to help us. Do you say nothing has come out of that room-absolutely nothing?
The landlady drew an envelope from her bag; from it she shook out two burnt matches and a cigarette-end upon the table.
They were on his tray this morning. I brought them because I had heard that you can read great things out of small ones.
"There is nothing here," said he. "The matches have, of course, been used to light cigarettes. That is obvious from the shortness of the burnt end.
Half the match is consumed in lighting a pipe or cigar. But, dear me! this cigarette stub is certainly remarkable.
I don't understand that. I should say that only a clean-shaven man could have smoked this. Why, Watson, even your modest moustache would have been singed.
"There are certainly some points of interest in this case, Watson," he remarked when the landlady had left us.
It may, of course, be trivial-individual eccentricity; or it may be very much deeper than appears on the surface.
The first thing that strikes one is the obvious possibility that the person now in the rooms may be entirely different from the one who engaged them.
Well, apart from this cigarette-end, was it not suggestive that the only time the lodger went out was immediately after his taking the rooms?
He came back-or someone came back-when all witnesses were out of the way. We have no proof that the person who came back was the person who went out.
Then, again, the man who took the rooms spoke English well. This other, however, prints 'match' when it should have been 'matches.'
I can imagine that the word was taken out of a dictionary, which would give the noun but not the plural.
The laconic style may be to conceal the absence of knowledge of English. Yes, Watson, there are good reasons to suspect that there has been a substitution of lodgers.
"Ah! there lies our problem. There is one rather obvious line of investigation." He took down the great book in which, day by day, he filed the agony columns of the various London journals.
"Dear me!" said he, turning over the pages, "what a chorus of groans, cries, and bleatings! What a rag-bag of singular happenings!
How is any news or any message to reach him from without? Obviously by advertisement through a newspaper.
There seems no other way, and fortunately we need concern ourselves with the one paper only. Here are the _Daily Gazette_ extracts of the last fortnight.
'Lady with a black boa at Prince's Skating Club'-that we may pass. 'Surely Jimmy will not break his mother's heart'-that appears to be irrelevant.
'If the lady who fainted on Brixton bus'-she does not interest me. 'Every day my heart longs-' Bleat, Watson-unmitigated bleat!
Ah, this is a little more possible. Listen to this: 'Be patient. Will find some sure means of communications.
Meanwhile, this column. G.' That is two days after Mrs. Warren's lodger arrived. It sounds plausible, does it not?
The mysterious one could understand English, even if he could not print it. Let us see if we can pick up the trace again.
Yes, here we are-three days later. 'Am making successful arrangements. Patience and prudence. The clouds will pass.
G.' Nothing for a week after that. Then comes something much more definite: 'The path is clearing. If I find chance signal message remember code agreed-One A, two B, and so on.
You will hear soon. G.' That was in yesterday's paper, and there is nothing in to-day's. It's all very appropriate to Mrs. Warren's lodger.
So it proved; for in the morning I found my friend standing on the hearthrug with his back to the fire and a smile of complete satisfaction upon his face.
"How's this, Watson?" he cried, picking up the paper from the table. "'High red house with white stone facings.
Third floor. Second window left. After dusk. G.' That is definite enough. I think after breakfast we must make a little reconnaissance of Mrs. Warren's neighbourhood.
Our client had suddenly burst into the room with an explosive energy which told of some new and momentous development.
"It's a police matter, Mr. Holmes!" she cried. "I'll have no more of it! He shall pack out of there with his baggage.
I would have gone straight up and told him so, only I thought it was but fair to you to take your opinion first.
Ah! that's what we want to know! It was this morning, sir. Mr. Warren is a timekeeper at Morton and Waylight's, in Tottenham Court Road.
They drove him an hour, and then opened the door and shot him out. He lay in the roadway so shaken in his wits that he never saw what became of the cab.
When he picked himself up he found he was on Hampstead Heath; so he took a bus home, and there he lies now on his sofa, while I came straight round to tell you what had happened.
No; he is clean dazed. He just knows that he was lifted up as if by magic and dropped as if by magic.
Well, we've lived there fifteen years and no such happenings ever came before. I've had enough of him.
Wait a bit, Mrs. Warren. Do nothing rash. I begin to think that this affair may be very much more important than appeared at first sight.
It is clear now that some danger is threatening your lodger. It is equally clear that his enemies, lying in wait for him near your door, mistook your husband for him in the foggy morning light.
On discovering their mistake they released him. What they would have done had it not been a mistake, we can only conjecture.
I don't see how that is to be managed, unless you break in the door. I always hear him unlock it as I go down the stair after I leave the tray.
Well, sir, there's the box-room opposite. I could arrange a looking-glass, maybe, and if you were behind the door-
Standing as it does near the corner of the street, it commands a view down Howe Street, with its more pretentious houses.
Holmes pointed with a chuckle to one of these, a row of residential flats, which projected so that they could not fail to catch the eye.
"See, Watson!" said he. "'High red house with stone facings.' There is the signal station all right. We know the place, and we know the code; so surely our task should be simple.
There's a 'to let' card in that window. It is evidently an empty flat to which the confederate has access.
I have it all ready for you. If you will both come up and leave your boots below on the landing, I'll put you there now.
It was an excellent hiding-place which she had arranged. The mirror was so placed that, seated in the dark, we could very plainly see the door opposite.
We had hardly settled down in it, and Mrs. Warren left us, when a distant tinkle announced that our mysterious neighbour had rung.
Presently the landlady appeared with the tray, laid it down upon a chair beside the closed door, and then, treading heavily, departed.
An instant later it was hurriedly replaced, and I caught a glimpse of a dark, beautiful, horrified face glaring at the narrow opening of the box-room.
Then the door crashed to, the key turned once more, and all was silence. Holmes twitched my sleeve, and together we stole down the stair.
"I will call again in the evening," said he to the expectant landlady. "I think, Watson, we can discuss this business better in our own quarters."
"My surmise, as you saw, proved to be correct," said he, speaking from the depths of his easy-chair. "There has been a substitution of lodgers.
Well, she saw something to alarm her. That is certain. The general sequence of events is pretty clear, is it not?
A couple seek refuge in London from a very terrible and instant danger. The measure of that danger is the rigour of their precautions.
The man, who has some work which he must do, desires to leave the woman in absolute safety while he does it.
It is not an easy problem, but he solved it in an original fashion, and so effectively that her presence was not even known to the landlady who supplies her with food.
The printed messages, as is now evident, were to prevent her sex being discovered by her writing. The man cannot come near the woman, or he will guide their enemies to her.
Since he cannot communicate with her direct, he has recourse to the agony column of a paper. So far all is clear.
Ah, yes, Watson-severely practical, as usual! What is at the root of it all? Mrs. Warren's whimsical problem enlarges somewhat and assumes a more sinister aspect as we proceed.
This much we can say: that it is no ordinary love escapade. You saw the woman's face at the sign of danger.
We have heard, too, of the attack upon the landlord, which was undoubtedly meant for the lodger. These alarms, and the desperate need for secrecy, argue that the matter is one of life or death.
The attack upon Mr. Warren further shows that the enemy, whoever they are, are themselves not aware of the substitution of the female lodger for the male.
What, indeed? It is art for art's sake, Watson. I suppose when you doctored you found yourself studying cases without thought of a fee?
Education never ends, Watson. It is a series of lessons with the greatest for the last. This is an instructive case.
There is neither money nor credit in it, and yet one would wish to tidy it up. When dusk comes we should find ourselves one stage advanced in our investigation.
As we peered from the darkened sitting-room of the lodging-house, one more dim light glimmered high up through the obscurity.
"Someone is moving in that room," said Holmes in a whisper, his gaunt and eager face thrust forward to the window-pane.
Yes, I can see his shadow. There he is again! He has a candle in his hand. Now he is peering across.
He wants to be sure that she is on the lookout. Now he begins to flash. Take the message also, Watson, that we may check each other.
A single flash-that is A, surely. Now, then. How many did you make it? Twenty. So did I. That should mean T. AT-that's intelligible enough.
Another T. Surely this is the beginning of a second word. Now, then-TENTA. Dead stop. That can't be all, Watson?
ATTENTA gives no sense. Nor is it any better as three words AT, TEN, TA, unless T. A. are a person's initials.
There it goes again! What's that? ATTE-why, it is the same message over again. Curious, Watson, very curious.
Now he is off once more! AT-why he is repeating it for the third time. ATTENTA three times! How often will he repeat it?
Not a doubt of it. It is a very urgent message, thrice repeated to make it more so. But beware of what?
Again we saw the dim silhouette of a crouching man and the whisk of the small flame across the window as the signals were renewed.
PERICOLO-pericolo-eh, what's that, Watson? 'Danger,' isn't it? Yes, by Jove, it's a danger signal. There he goes again!
The light had suddenly gone out, the glimmering square of window had disappeared, and the third floor formed a dark band round the lofty building, with its tiers of shining casements.
That last warning cry had been suddenly cut short. How, and by whom? The same thought occurred on the instant to us both.
"This is serious, Watson," he cried. "There is some devilry going forward! Why should such a message stop in such a way?
We must define the situation a little more clearly. It may bear some more innocent interpretation. Come, Watson, let us go across ourselves and see what we can make of it.
At the doorway of the Howe Street flats a man, muffled in a cravat and greatcoat, was leaning against the railing.
"Why, Gregson!" said my companion as he shook hands with the Scotland Yard detective. "Journeys end with lovers' meetings.
Yes, from that window. They broke off in the middle. We came over to see the reason. But since it is safe in your hands I see no object in continuing this business.
"Wait a bit!" cried Gregson eagerly. "I'll do you this justice, Mr. Holmes, that I was never in a case yet that I didn't feel stronger for having you on my side.
"May I introduce you to Mr. Sherlock Holmes?" he said to the cabman. "This is Mr. Leverton, of Pinkerton's American Agency."
The American, a quiet, businesslike young man, with a clean-shaven, hatchet face, flushed up at the words of commendation.
Oh, he has a European fame, has he? Well, we've learned all about him in America. We know he is at the bottom of fifty murders, and yet we have nothing positive we can take him on.
I tracked him over from New York, and I've been close to him for a week in London, waiting some excuse to get my hand on his collar.
Mr. Gregson and I ran him to ground in that big tenement house, and there's only one door, so he can't slip us.
"Mr. Holmes talks of signals," said Gregson. "I expect, as usual, he knows a good deal that we don't."
In a few clear words Holmes explained the situation as it had appeared to us. The American struck his hands together with vexation.
Well, it figures out that way, does it not? Here he is, sending out messages to an accomplice-there are several of his gang in London.
Then suddenly, just as by your own account he was telling them that there was danger, he broke short off.
"He is in unoccupied premises under suspicious circumstances," said Gregson. "That is good enough for the moment.
When we have him by the heels we can see if New York can't help us to keep him. I'll take the responsibility of arresting him now.
The Pinkerton man had tried to push past him, but Gregson had firmly elbowed him back. London dangers were the privilege of the London force.
The door of the left-hand flat upon the third landing was standing ajar. Gregson pushed it open. Within all was absolute silence and darkness.
I struck a match and lit the detective's lantern. As I did so, and as the flicker steadied into a flame, we all gave a gasp of surprise.
On the deal boards of the carpetless floor there was outlined a fresh track of blood. The red steps pointed towards us and led away from an inner room, the door of which was closed.
Gregson flung it open and held his light full blaze in front of him, while we all peered eagerly over his shoulders.
His knees were drawn up, his hands thrown out in agony, and from the centre of his broad, brown, upturned throat there projected the white haft of a knife driven blade-deep into his body.
Giant as he was, the man must have gone down like a pole-axed ox before that terrific blow. Beside his right hand a most formidable horn-handled, two-edged dagger lay upon the floor, and near it a black kid glove.
"By George! it's Black Gorgiano himself!" cried the American detective. "Someone has got ahead of us this time."
Holmes had stepped across, had lit the candle, and was passing it backward and forward across the window-panes.
"I rather think that will be helpful," said he. He came over and stood in deep thought while the two professionals were examining the body.
"You say that three people came out from the flat while you were waiting downstairs," said he at last.
That is your man, I fancy. I can give you his description, and we have a very excellent outline of his footmark.
We all turned round at the words. There, framed in the doorway, was a tall and beautiful woman-the mysterious lodger of Bloomsbury.
Slowly she advanced, her face pale and drawn with a frightful apprehension, her eyes fixed and staring, her terrified gaze riveted upon the dark figure on the floor.
"You have killed him!" she muttered. "Oh, _Dio mio_, you have killed him!" Then I heard a sudden sharp intake of her breath, and she sprang into the air with a cry of joy.
Round and round the room she danced, her hands clapping, her dark eyes gleaming with delighted wonder, and a thousand pretty Italian exclamations pouring from her lips.
It was terrible and amazing to see such a woman so convulsed with joy at such a sight. Suddenly she stopped and gazed at us all with a questioning stare.
"But where, then, is Gennaro?" she asked. "He is my husband, Gennaro Lucca. I am Emilia Lucca, and we are both from New York.
Your cipher was not difficult, madam. Your presence here was desirable. I knew that I had only to flash '_Vieni_' and you would surely come.
"I do not understand how you know these things," she said. "Giuseppe Gorgiano-how did he-" She paused, and then suddenly her face lit up with pride and delight.
Now I see it! My Gennaro! My splendid, beautiful Gennaro, who has guarded me safe from all harm, he did it, with his own strong hand he killed the monster!
"Well, Mrs. Lucca," said the prosaic Gregson, laying his hand upon the lady's sleeve with as little sentiment as if she were a Notting Hill hooligan, "I am not very clear yet who you are or what you are; but you've said enough to make it very clear that we shall want you at the Yard."
"One moment, Gregson," said Holmes. "I rather fancy that this lady may be as anxious to give us information as we can be to get it.
You understand, madam, that your husband will be arrested and tried for the death of the man who lies before us?
What you say may be used in evidence. But if you think that he has acted from motives which are not criminal, and which he would wish to have known, then you cannot serve him better than by telling us the whole story.
"Now that Gorgiano is dead we fear nothing," said the lady. "He was a devil and a monster, and there can be no judge in the world who would punish my husband for having killed him."
"In that case," said Holmes, "my suggestion is that we lock this door, leave things as we found them, go with this lady to her room, and form our opinion after we have heard what it is that she has to say to us."
Half an hour later we were seated, all four, in the small sitting-room of Signora Lucca, listening to her remarkable narrative of those sinister events, the ending of which we had chanced to witness.
She spoke in rapid and fluent but very unconventional English, which, for the sake of clearness, I will make grammatical.
The rest, gentlemen, you know for yourselves. We were sure that our enemies would be behind us like our own shadows.
Gorgiano had his private reasons for vengeance, but in any case we knew how ruthless, cunning, and untiring he could be.
Both Italy and America are full of stories of his dreadful powers. If ever they were exerted it would be now.
My darling made use of the few clear days which our start had given us in arranging for a refuge for me in such a fashion that no possible danger could reach me.
For his own part, he wished to be free that he might communicate both with the American and with the Italian police.
I do not myself know where he lived, or how. All that I learned was through the columns of a newspaper.
But once as I looked through my window, I saw two Italians watching the house, and I understood that in some way Gorgiano had found our retreat.
Finally Gennaro told me, through the paper, that he would signal to me from a certain window, but when the signals came they were nothing but warnings, which were suddenly interrupted.
It is very clear to me now that he knew Gorgiano to be close upon him, and that, thank God! he was ready for him when he came.
And now, gentleman, I would ask you whether we have anything to fear from the law, or whether any judge upon earth would condemn my Gennaro for what he has done?
"Well, Mr. Gregson," said the American, looking across at the official, "I don't know what your British point of view may be, but I guess that in New York this lady's husband will receive a pretty general vote of thanks."
"She will have to come with me and see the chief," Gregson answered. "If what she says is corroborated, I do not think she or her husband has much to fear.
But what I can't make head or tail of, Mr. Holmes, is how on earth you got yourself mixed up in the matter.
Education, Gregson, education. Still seeking knowledge at the old university. Well, Watson, you have one more specimen of the tragic and grotesque to add to your collection.
By the way, it is not eight o'clock, and a Wagner night at Covent Garden! If we hurry, we might be in time for the second act.
"But why Turkish?" asked Mr. Sherlock Holmes, gazing fixedly at my boots. I was reclining in a cane-backed chair at the moment, and my protruded feet had attracted his ever-active attention.
"The bath!" he said; "the bath! Why the relaxing and expensive Turkish rather than the invigorating home-made article?"
"By the way, Holmes," I added, "I have no doubt the connection between my boots and a Turkish bath is a perfectly self-evident one to a logical mind, and yet I should be obliged to you if you would indicate it."
"The train of reasoning is not very obscure, Watson," said Holmes with a mischievous twinkle. "It belongs to the same elementary class of deduction which I should illustrate if I were to ask you who shared your cab in your drive this morning."
Bravo, Watson! A very dignified and logical remonstrance. Let me see, what were the points? Take the last one first-the cab.
Therefore it is clear that you sat at the side. Therefore it is equally clear that you had a companion.
Equally childish. You are in the habit of doing up your boots in a certain way. I see them on this occasion fastened with an elaborate double bow, which is not your usual method of tying them.
You have, therefore, had them off. Who has tied them? A bootmaker-or the boy at the bath. It is unlikely that it is the bootmaker, since your boots are nearly new.
Well, what remains? The bath. Absurd, is it not? But, for all that, the Turkish bath has served a purpose.
You say that you have had it because you need a change. Let me suggest that you take one. How would Lausanne do, my dear Watson-first-class tickets and all expenses paid on a princely scale?
She is helpless. She is migratory. She has sufficient means to take her from country to country and from hotel to hotel.
She is lost, as often as not, in a maze of obscure pensions and boardinghouses. She is a stray chicken in a world of foxes.
When she is gobbled up she is hardly missed. I much fear that some evil has come to the Lady Frances Carfax.
I was relieved at this sudden descent from the general to the particular. Holmes consulted his notes.
"Lady Frances," he continued, "is the sole survivor of the direct family of the late Earl of Rufton. The estates went, as you may remember, in the male line.
A rather pathetic figure, the Lady Frances, a beautiful woman, still in fresh middle age, and yet, by a strange change, the last derelict of what only twenty years ago was a goodly fleet.
Lady Frances seems to have left there and given no address. The family are anxious, and as they are exceedingly wealthy no sum will be spared if we can clear the matter up.
There is one correspondent who is a sure draw, Watson. That is the bank. Single ladies must live, and their passbooks are compressed diaries.
She banks at Silvester's. I have glanced over her account. The last check but one paid her bill at Lausanne, but it was a large one and probably left her with cash in hand.
That also I have been able to discover. Miss Marie Devine was the maid of Lady Frances Carfax. Why she should have paid her this check we have not yet determined.
Hence the health-giving expedition to Lausanne. You know that I cannot possibly leave London while old Abrahams is in such mortal terror of his life.
Besides, on general principles it is best that I should not leave the country. Scotland Yard feels lonely without me, and it causes an unhealthy excitement among the criminal classes.
Go, then, my dear Watson, and if my humble counsel can ever be valued at so extravagant a rate as two pence a word, it waits your disposal night and day at the end of the Continental wire.
Lady Frances, as he informed me, had stayed there for several weeks. She had been much liked by all who met her.
Her age was not more than forty. She was still handsome and bore every sign of having in her youth been a very lovely woman.
M. Moser knew nothing of any valuable jewellery, but it had been remarked by the servants that the heavy trunk in the lady's bedroom was always scrupulously locked.
Marie Devine, the maid, was as popular as her mistress. She was actually engaged to one of the head waiters in the hotel, and there was no difficulty in getting her address.
It was 11, Rue de Trajan, Montpellier. All this I jotted down and felt that Holmes himself could not have been more adroit in collecting his facts.
Only one corner still remained in the shadow. No light which I possessed could clear up the cause for the lady's sudden departure.
She was very happy at Lausanne. There was every reason to believe that she intended to remain for the season in her luxurious rooms overlooking the lake.
And yet she had left at a single day's notice, which involved her in the useless payment of a week's rent.
Only Jules Vibart, the lover of the maid, had any suggestion to offer. He connected the sudden departure with the visit to the hotel a day or two before of a tall, dark, bearded man.
"_Un sauvage-un veritable sauvage!_" cried Jules Vibart. The man had rooms somewhere in the town. He had been seen talking earnestly to Madame on the promenade by the lake.
Then he had called. She had refused to see him. He was English, but of his name there was no record. Madame had left the place immediately afterwards.
Jules Vibart, and, what was of more importance, Jules Vibart's sweetheart, thought that this call and the departure were cause and effect.
Only one thing Jules would not discuss. That was the reason why Marie had left her mistress. Of that he could or would say nothing.
So ended the first chapter of my inquiry. The second was devoted to the place which Lady Frances Carfax had sought when she left Lausanne.
Concerning this there had been some secrecy, which confirmed the idea that she had gone with the intention of throwing someone off her track.
Otherwise why should not her luggage have been openly labelled for Baden? Both she and it reached the Rhenish spa by some circuitous route.
This much I gathered from the manager of Cook's local office. So to Baden I went, after dispatching to Holmes an account of all my proceedings and receiving in reply a telegram of half-humorous commendation.
At Baden the track was not difficult to follow. Lady Frances had stayed at the Englischer Hof for a fortnight.
While there she had made the acquaintance of a Dr. Shlessinger and his wife, a missionary from South America.
He was preparing a map of the Holy Land, with special reference to the kingdom of the Midianites, upon which he was writing a monograph.
Finally, having improved much in health, he and his wife had returned to London, and Lady Frances had started thither in their company.
"By the way," said the landlord in conclusion, "you are not the only friend of Lady Frances Carfax who is inquiring after her just now.
Exactly. That describes him very well. He is a bulky, bearded, sunburned fellow, who looks as if he would be more at home in a farmers' inn than in a fashionable hotel.
Already the mystery began to define itself, as figures grow clearer with the lifting of a fog. Here was this good and pious lady pursued from place to place by a sinister and unrelenting figure.
She feared him, or she would not have fled from Lausanne. He had still followed. Sooner or later he would overtake her.
Had he already overtaken her? Was that the secret of her continued silence? Could the good people who were her companions not screen her from his violence or his blackmail?
What horrible purpose, what deep design, lay behind this long pursuit? There was the problem which I had to solve.
To Holmes I wrote showing how rapidly and surely I had got down to the roots of the matter. In reply I had a telegram asking for a description of Dr. Shlessinger's left ear.
Holmes's ideas of humour are strange and occasionally offensive, so I took no notice of his ill-timed jest-indeed, I had already reached Montpellier in my pursuit of the maid, Marie, before his message came.
Lady Frances had given her fifty pounds as a wedding-present. Like me, Marie viewed with deep distrust the stranger who had driven her mistress from Lausanne.
With her own eyes she had seen him seize the lady's wrist with great violence on the public promenade by the lake.
He was a fierce and terrible man. She believed that it was out of dread of him that Lady Frances had accepted the escort of the Shlessingers to London.
She had never spoken to Marie about it, but many little signs had convinced the maid that her mistress lived in a state of continual nervous apprehension.
So far she had got in her narrative, when suddenly she sprang from her chair and her face was convulsed with surprise and fear.
Through the open sitting-room window I saw a huge, swarthy man with a bristling black beard walking slowly down the centre of the street and staring eagerly at the numbers of the houses.
It was clear that, like myself, he was on the track of the maid. Acting upon the impulse of the moment, I rushed out and accosted him.
The fellow gave a bellow of anger and sprang upon me like a tiger. I have held my own in many a struggle, but the man had a grip of iron and the fury of a fiend.
He stood for an instant fuming with rage and uncertain whether he should not renew his attack. Then, with a snarl of anger, he left me and entered the cottage from which I had just come.
"Well, Watson," said he, "a very pretty hash you have made of it! I rather think you had better come back with me to London by the night express."
An hour afterwards, Sherlock Holmes, in his usual garb and style, was seated in my private room at the hotel.
His explanation of his sudden and opportune appearance was simplicity itself, for, finding that he could get away from London, he determined to head me off at the next obvious point of my travels.
"And a singularly consistent investigation you have made, my dear Watson," said he. "I cannot at the moment recall any possible blunder which you have omitted.
The total effect of your proceeding has been to give the alarm everywhere and yet to discover nothing.
There is no 'perhaps' about it. I have done better. Here is the Hon. Philip Green, who is a fellow-lodger with you in this hotel, and we may find him the starting-point for a more successful investigation.
A card had come up on a salver, and it was followed by the same bearded ruffian who had attacked me in the street.
"What is this, Mr. Holmes?" he asked. "I had your note and I have come. But what has this man to do with the matter?"
I hope I didn't harm you. When you accused me of hurting her I lost my grip of myself. Indeed, I'm not responsible in these days.
My nerves are like live wires. But this situation is beyond me. What I want to know, in the first place, Mr. Holmes, is, how in the world you came to hear of my existence at all.
I was a wild youngster, I know-not worse than others of my class. But her mind was pure as snow. She could not bear a shadow of coarseness.
When the years had passed and I had made my money at Barberton I thought perhaps I could seek her out and soften her.
I had heard that she was still unmarried, I found her at Lausanne and tried all I knew. She weakened, I think, but her will was strong, and when next I called she had left the town.
I traced her to Baden, and then after a time heard that her maid was here. I'm a rough fellow, fresh from a rough life, and when Dr. Watson spoke to me as he did I lost hold of myself for a moment.
"That is for us to find out," said Sherlock Holmes with peculiar gravity. "What is your London address, Mr.
I can say no more for the instant. I will leave you this card so that you may be able to keep in touch with us.
Now, Watson, if you will pack your bag I will cable to Mrs. Hudson to make one of her best efforts for two hungry travellers at 7:30 to-morrow.
A telegram was awaiting us when we reached our Baker Street rooms, which Holmes read with an exclamation of interest and threw across to me.
"It is everything," Holmes answered. "You may remember my seemingly irrelevant question as to this clerical gentleman's left ear.
Exactly. For this reason I sent a duplicate to the manager of the Englischer Hof, whose answer lies here.
It shows, my dear Watson, that we are dealing with an exceptionally astute and dangerous man. The Rev.
His particular specialty is the beguiling of lonely ladies by playing upon their religious feelings, and his so-called wife, an Englishwoman named Fraser, is a worthy helpmate.
The nature of his tactics suggested his identity to me, and this physical peculiarity-he was badly bitten in a saloon-fight at Adelaide in '89-confirmed my suspicion.
This poor lady is in the hands of a most infernal couple, who will stick at nothing, Watson. That she is already dead is a very likely supposition.
If not, she is undoubtedly in some sort of confinement and unable to write to Miss Dobney or her other friends.
All my instincts tell me that she is in London, but as we have at present no possible means of telling where, we can only take the obvious steps, eat our dinner, and possess our souls in patience.
But neither the official police nor Holmes's own small but very efficient organisation sufficed to clear away the mystery.
Amid the crowded millions of London the three persons we sought were as completely obliterated as if they had never lived.
Advertisements were tried, and failed. Clues were followed, and led to nothing. Every criminal resort which Shlessinger might frequent was drawn in vain.
His old associates were watched, but they kept clear of him. And then suddenly, after a week of helpless suspense there came a flash of light.
A silver-and-brilliant pendant of old Spanish design had been pawned at Bovington's, in Westminster Road.
The pawner was a large, clean-shaven man of clerical appearance. His name and address were demonstrably false.
Three times had our bearded friend from the Langham called for news-the third time within an hour of this fresh development.
His clothes were getting looser on his great body. He seemed to be wilting away in his anxiety. "If you will only give me something to do!"
Supposing that they have held her prisoner up to now, it is clear that they cannot let her loose without their own destruction.
It is possible that he will go to some other pawnbroker in the future. In that case, we must begin again.
On the other hand, he has had a fair price and no questions asked, so if he is in need of ready-money he will probably come back to Bovington's.
I will give you a note to them, and they will let you wait in the shop. If the fellow comes you will follow him home.
But no indiscretion, and, above all, no violence. I put you on your honour that you will take no step without my knowledge and consent.
For two days the Hon. Philip Green (he was, I may mention, the son of the famous admiral of that name who commanded the Sea of Azof fleet in the Crimean War) brought us no news.
On the evening of the third he rushed into our sitting-room, pale, trembling, with every muscle of his powerful frame quivering with excitement.
He was incoherent in his agitation. Holmes soothed him with a few words and thrust him into an armchair.
She came only an hour ago. It was the wife, this time, but the pendant she brought was the fellow of the other.
She left the office and I followed her. She walked up the Kennington Road, and I kept behind her. Presently she went into a shop.
My companion started. "Well?" he asked in that vibrant voice which told of the fiery soul behind the cold grey face.
She was talking to the woman behind the counter. I entered as well. 'It is late,' I heard her say, or words to that effect.
The woman was excusing herself. 'It should be there before now,' she answered. 'It took longer, being out of the ordinary.'
The woman came out, but I had hid myself in a doorway. Her suspicions had been aroused, I think, for she looked round her.
Then she called a cab and got in. I was lucky enough to get another and so to follow her. She got down at last at No.
The windows were all in darkness save one on the lower floor. The blind was down, and I could not see in.
I was standing there, wondering what I should do next, when a covered van drove up with two men in it.
They descended, took something out of the van, and carried it up the steps to the hall door. Mr. Holmes, it was a coffin.
For an instant I was on the point of rushing in. The door had been opened to admit the men and their burden.
It was the woman who had opened it. But as I stood there she caught a glimpse of me, and I think that she recognised me.
There may be some difficulty, but I should think that the sale of the jewellery should be sufficient.
But they may murder her in the meanwhile. What could the coffin mean, and for whom could it be but for her?
"Let us try to reconstruct the situation," said he as we drove swiftly past the Houses of Parliament and over Westminster Bridge.
These villains have coaxed this unhappy lady to London, after first alienating her from her faithful maid.
If she has written any letters they have been intercepted. Through some confederate they have engaged a furnished house.
Once inside it, they have made her a prisoner, and they have become possessed of the valuable jewellery which has been their object from the first.
Already they have begun to sell part of it, which seems safe enough to them, since they have no reason to think that anyone is interested in the lady's fate.
When she is released she will, of course, denounce them. Therefore, she must not be released. But they cannot keep her under lock and key forever.
Now we will take another line of reasoning. When you follow two separate chains of thought, Watson, you will find some point of intersection which should approximate to the truth.
We will start now, not from the lady but from the coffin and argue backward. That incident proves, I fear, beyond all doubt that the lady is dead.
It points also to an orthodox burial with proper accompaniment of medical certificate and official sanction.
Had the lady been obviously murdered, they would have buried her in a hole in the back garden. But here all is open and regular.
What does this mean? Surely that they have done her to death in some way which has deceived the doctor and simulated a natural end-poisoning, perhaps.
And yet how strange that they should ever let a doctor approach her unless he were a confederate, which is hardly a credible proposition.
Dangerous, Watson, very dangerous. No, I hardly see them doing that. Pull up, cabby! This is evidently the undertaker's, for we have just passed the pawnbroker's.
Would you go in, Watson? Your appearance inspires confidence. Ask what hour the Poultney Square funeral takes place to-morrow.
The woman in the shop answered me without hesitation that it was to be at eight o'clock in the morning.
You see, Watson, no mystery; everything above-board! In some way the legal forms have undoubtedly been complied with, and they think that they have little to fear.
Well, well, we shall be strong enough. 'Thrice is he armed who hath his quarrel just.' We simply can't afford to wait for the police or to keep within the four corners of the law.
You can drive off, cabby. Now, Watson, we'll just take our luck together, as we have occasionally in the past.
He had rung loudly at the door of a great dark house in the centre of Poultney Square. It was opened immediately, and the figure of a tall woman was outlined against the dim-lit hall.
"There is no such person here," she answered, and tried to close the door, but Holmes had jammed it with his foot.
She hesitated. Then she threw open the door. "Well, come in!" said she. "My husband is not afraid to face any man in the world."
She closed the door behind us and showed us into a sitting-room on the right side of the hall, turning up the gas as she left us.
He had a large red face, with pendulous cheeks, and a general air of superficial benevolence which was marred by a cruel, vicious mouth.
"There is surely some mistake here, gentlemen," he said in an unctuous, make-everything-easy voice. "I fancy that you have been misdirected.
"That will do; we have no time to waste," said my companion firmly. "You are Henry Peters, of Adelaide, late the Rev.
Dr. Shlessinger, of Baden and South America. I am as sure of that as that my own name is Sherlock Holmes.
Peters, as I will now call him, started and stared hard at his formidable pursuer. "I guess your name does not frighten me, Mr. Holmes," said he coolly.
I want to know what you have done with the Lady Frances Carfax, whom you brought away with you from Baden.
She attached herself to Mrs. Peters and me at Baden-it is a fact that I was using another name at the time-and she stuck on to us until we came to London.
I paid her bill and her ticket. Once in London, she gave us the slip, and, as I say, left these out-of-date jewels to pay her bills.
"So you might describe me," said Holmes cheerfully. "My companion is also a dangerous ruffian. And together we are going through your house."
"Fetch a policeman, Annie!" said he. There was a whisk of feminine skirts down the passage, and the hall door was opened and shut.
"Our time is limited, Watson," said Holmes. "If you try to stop us, Peters, you will most certainly get hurt.
"Then without it." With a quick movement Holmes pushed the fellow to one side and passed into the hall.
A door half opened stood immediately before us. We entered. It was the dining-room. On the table, under a half-lit chandelier, the coffin was lying.
Holmes turned up the gas and raised the lid. Deep down in the recesses of the coffin lay an emaciated figure.
The glare from the lights above beat down upon an aged and withered face. By no possible process of cruelty, starvation, or disease could this worn-out wreck be the still beautiful Lady Frances.
"Ah, you've blundered badly for once, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said Peters, who had followed us into the room.
Well, if you really must know, she is an old nurse of my wife's, Rose Spender by name, whom we found in the Brixton Workhouse Infirmary.
We brought her round here, called in Dr. Horsom, of 13, Firbank Villas-mind you take the address, Mr. Holmes-and had her carefully tended, as Christian folk should.
On the third day she died-certificate says senile decay-but that's only the doctor's opinion, and of course you know better.
We ordered her funeral to be carried out by Stimson and Co., of the Kennington Road, who will bury her at eight o'clock to-morrow morning.
Can you pick any hole in that, Mr. Holmes? You've made a silly blunder, and you may as well own up to it.
I'd give something for a photograph of your gaping, staring face when you pulled aside that lid expecting to see the Lady Frances Carfax and only found a poor old woman of ninety.
Holmes's expression was as impassive as ever under the jeers of his antagonist, but his clenched hands betrayed his acute annoyance.
"Are you, though!" cried Peters as a woman's voice and heavy steps sounded in the passage. "We'll soon see about that.
This way, officers, if you please. These men have forced their way into my house, and I cannot get rid of them.
"Bless you, sir, we know you very well," said the sergeant, "but you can't stay here without a warrant."
"We know where to lay our hands on this gentleman if he is wanted," said the sergeant majestically, "but you'll have to go, Mr.
A minute later we were in the street once more. Holmes was as cool as ever, but I was hot with anger and humiliation.
Then I'll keep my eye on the parties, Mr. Holmes. If anything comes along, I will surely let you know.
The doctor was our next goal. He had been called in, had found the woman dying of pure senility, had actually seen her pass away, and had signed the certificate in due form.
"I assure you that everything was perfectly normal and there was no room for foul play in the matter," said he.
Nothing in the house had struck him as suspicious save that for people of their class it was remarkable that they should have no servant.
Finally we found our way to Scotland Yard. There had been difficulties of procedure in regard to the warrant.
Some delay was inevitable. The magistrate's signature might not be obtained until next morning. If Holmes would call about nine he could go down with Lestrade and see it acted upon.
Several times in the course of the night I heard him prowling about the house. Finally, just after I had been called in the morning, he rushed into my room.
He was in his dressing-gown, but his pale, hollow-eyed face told me that his night had been a sleepless one.
"What time was the funeral? Eight, was it not?" he asked eagerly. "Well, it is 7:20 now. Good heavens, Watson, what has become of any brains that God has given me?
Quick, man, quick! It's life or death-a hundred chances on death to one on life. I'll never forgive myself, never, if we are too late!
Five minutes had not passed before we were flying in a hansom down Baker Street. But even so it was twenty-five to eight as we passed Big Ben, and eight struck as we tore down the Brixton Road.
"Take it back!" he cried, laying his hand on the breast of the foremost. "Take it back this instant!"
"What the devil do you mean? Once again I ask you, where is your warrant?" shouted the furious Peters, his big red face glaring over the farther end of the coffin.
The authority in Holmes's voice had its effect upon the bearers. Peters had suddenly vanished into the house, and they obeyed these new orders.
"Quick, Watson, quick! Here is a screw-driver!" he shouted as the coffin was replaced upon the table.
Here's one for you, my man! A sovereign if the lid comes off in a minute! Ask no questions-work away!
That's good! Another! And another! Now pull all together! It's giving! It's giving! Ah, that does it at last.
With a united effort we tore off the coffin-lid. As we did so there came from the inside a stupefying and overpowering smell of chloroform.
For half an hour it seemed that we were. What with actual suffocation, and what with the poisonous fumes of the chloroform, the Lady Frances seemed to have passed the last point of recall.
A cab had driven up, and Holmes, parting the blind, looked out at it. "Here is Lestrade with his warrant," said he.
"He will find that his birds have flown. And here," he added as a heavy step hurried along the passage, "is someone who has a better right to nurse this lady than we have.
Good morning, Mr. Green; I think that the sooner we can move the Lady Frances the better. Meanwhile, the funeral may proceed, and the poor old woman who still lies in that coffin may go to her last resting-place alone.
It was a desperate chance that we might find her alive, but it was a chance, as the result showed. These people had never, to my knowledge, done a murder.
They might shrink from actual violence at the last. The could bury her with no sign of how she met her end, and even if she were exhumed there was a chance for them.
I hoped that such considerations might prevail with them. You can reconstruct the scene well enough. You saw the horrible den upstairs, where the poor lady had been kept so long.
They rushed in and overpowered her with their chloroform, carried her down, poured more into the coffin to insure against her waking, and then screwed down the lid.
A clever device, Watson. It is new to me in the annals of crime. If our ex-missionary friends escape the clutches of Lestrade, I shall expect to hear of some brilliant incidents in their future career.
On the other hand, his payments were princely. I have no doubt that the house might have been purchased at the price which Holmes paid for his rooms during the years that I was with him.
The landlady stood in the deepest awe of him and never dared to interfere with him, however outrageous his proceedings might seem.
She was fond of him, too, for he had a remarkable gentleness and courtesy in his dealings with women.
He disliked and distrusted the sex, but he was always a chivalrous opponent. Knowing how genuine was her regard for him, I listened earnestly to her story when she came to my rooms in the second year of my married life and told me of the sad condition to which my poor friend was reduced.
"He's dying, Dr. Watson," said she. "For three days he has been sinking, and I doubt if he will last the day.
He would not let me get a doctor. This morning when I saw his bones sticking out of his face and his great bright eyes looking at me I could stand no more of it.
'With your leave or without it, Mr. Holmes, I am going for a doctor this very hour,' said I. 'Let it be Watson, then,' said he.
I was horrified for I had heard nothing of his illness. I need not say that I rushed for my coat and my hat.
There is little I can tell you, sir. He has been working at a case down at Rotherhithe, in an alley near the river, and he has brought this illness back with him.
He took to his bed on Wednesday afternoon and has never moved since. For these three days neither food nor drink has passed his lips.
He wouldn't have it, sir. You know how masterful he is. I didn't dare to disobey him. But he's not long for this world, as you'll see for yourself the moment that you set eyes on him.
He lay listlessly as I entered the room, but the sight of me brought a gleam of recognition to his eyes.
"Well, Watson, we seem to have fallen upon evil days," said he in a feeble voice, but with something of his old carelessness of manner.
"Stand back! Stand right back!" said he with the sharp imperiousness which I had associated only with moments of crisis.
Yes, Mrs. Hudson was right. He was more masterful than ever. It was pitiful, however, to see his exhaustion.
I know what is the matter with me. It is a coolie disease from Sumatra-a thing that the Dutch know more about than we, though they have made little of it up to date.
Good heavens, Holmes! Do you suppose that such a consideration weighs with me of an instant? It would not affect me in the case of a stranger.
I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of Holmes that I have always deferred to his wishes, even when I least understood them.
But now all my professional instincts were aroused. Let him be my master elsewhere, I at least was his in a sick room.
"Holmes," said I, "you are not yourself. A sick man is but a child, and so I will treat you. Whether you like it or not, I will examine your symptoms and treat you for them."
"If I am to have a doctor whether I will or not, let me at least have someone in whom I have confidence," said he.
In your friendship, certainly. But facts are facts, Watson, and, after all, you are only a general practitioner with very limited experience and mediocre qualifications.
Such a remark is unworthy of you, Holmes. It shows me very clearly the state of your own nerves. But if you have no confidence in me I would not intrude my services.
Let me bring Sir Jasper Meek or Penrose Fisher, or any of the best men in London. But someone you must have, and that is final.
If you think that I am going to stand here and see you die without either helping you myself or bringing anyone else to help you, then you have mistaken your man.
"You mean well, Watson," said the sick man with something between a sob and a groan. "Shall I demonstrate your own ignorance?
"There are many problems of disease, many strange pathological possibilities, in the East, Watson." He paused after each sentence to collect his failing strength.
I have learned so much during some recent researches which have a medico-criminal aspect. It was in the course of them that I contracted this complaint.
Possibly not. But I happen to know that Dr. Ainstree, the greatest living authority upon tropical disease, is now in London.
All remonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this instant to fetch him." I turned resolutely to the door.
Never have I had such a shock! In an instant, with a tiger-spring, the dying man had intercepted me. I heard the sharp snap of a twisted key.
The next moment he had staggered back to his bed, exhausted and panting after his one tremendous outflame of energy.
You won't take the key from me by force, Watson, I've got you, my friend. Here you are, and here you will stay until I will otherwise.
But I'll humour you." (All this in little gasps, with terrible struggles for breath between.) "You've only my own good at heart.
Of course I know that very well. You shall have your way, but give me time to get my strength. Not now, Watson, not now.
None in the world, Watson. Thank you, I need no help in arranging the clothes. You will please keep your distance.
Now, Watson, there is one other condition that I would make. You will seek help, not from the man you mention, but from the one that I choose.
The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you entered this room, Watson. You will find some books over there.
I am somewhat exhausted; I wonder how a battery feels when it pours electricity into a non-conductor?
But it was destined to be resumed long before that hour, and in circumstances which gave me a shock hardly second to that caused by his spring to the door.
I had stood for some minutes looking at the silent figure in the bed. His face was almost covered by the clothes and he appeared to be asleep.
Then, unable to settle down to reading, I walked slowly round the room, examining the pictures of celebrated criminals with which every wall was adorned.
In the midst of these was a small black and white ivory box with a sliding lid. It was a neat little thing, and I had stretched out my hand to examine it more closely, when--
It was a dreadful cry that he gave-a yell which might have been heard down the street. My skin went cold and my hair bristled at that horrible scream.
As I turned I caught a glimpse of a convulsed face and frantic eyes. I stood paralysed, with the little box in my hand.
"Put it down! Down, this instant, Watson-this instant, I say!" His head sank back upon the pillow and he gave a deep sigh of relief as I replaced the box upon the mantelpiece.
I hate to have my things touched, Watson. You know that I hate it. You fidget me beyond endurance. You, a doctor-you are enough to drive a patient into an asylum.
Of all ruins, that of a noble mind is the most deplorable. I sat in silent dejection until the stipulated time had passed.
He seemed to have been watching the clock as well as I, for it was hardly six before he began to talk with the same feverish animation as before.
Ah, too few! Too few! How very unfortunate, Watson! However, such as they are you can put them in your watchpocket.
And all the rest of your money in your left trouser pocket. Thank you. It will balance you so much better like that.
You will now light the gas, Watson, but you will be very careful that not for one instant shall it be more than half on.
I implore you to be careful, Watson. Thank you, that is excellent. No, you need not draw the blind. Now you will have the kindness to place some letters and papers upon this table within my reach.
Thank you. Now some of that litter from the mantelpiece. Excellent, Watson! There is a sugar-tongs there.
Kindly raise that small ivory box with its assistance. Place it here among the papers. Good! You can now go and fetch Mr. Culverton Smith, of 13, Lower Burke Street.
To tell the truth, my desire to fetch a doctor had somewhat weakened, for poor Holmes was so obviously delirious that it seemed dangerous to leave him.
Possibly not, my good Watson. It may surprise you to know that the man upon earth who is best versed in this disease is not a medical man, but a planter.
He is a very methodical person, and I did not desire you to start before six, because I was well aware that you would not find him in his study.
If you could persuade him to come here and give us the benefit of his unique experience of this disease, the investigation of which has been his dearest hobby, I cannot doubt that he could help me.
He still retained, however, the jaunty gallantry of his speech. To the last gasp he would always be the master.
"You will tell him exactly how you have left me," said he. "You will convey the very impression which is in your own mind-a dying man-a dying and delirious man.
Indeed, I cannot think why the whole bed of the ocean is not one solid mass of oysters, so prolific the creatures seem.
Ah, yes, I remember. My life depends upon it. Plead with him, Watson. There is no good feeling between us.
His nephew, Watson-I had suspicions of foul play and I allowed him to see it. The boy died horribly. He has a grudge against me.
You will do nothing of the sort. You will persuade him to come. And then you will return in front of him.
Make any excuse so as not to come with him. Don't forget, Watson. You won't fail me. You never did fail me.
No doubt there are natural enemies which limit the increase of the creatures. You and I, Watson, we have done our part.
Shall the world, then, be overrun by oysters? No, no; horrible! You'll convey all that is in your mind.
I left him full of the image of this magnificent intellect babbling like a foolish child. He had handed me the key, and with a happy thought I took it with me lest he should lock himself in.
Mrs. Hudson was waiting, trembling and weeping, in the passage. Behind me as I passed from the flat I heard Holmes's high, thin voice in some delirious chant.
He looked at me in a most singular fashion. Had it not been too fiendish, I could have imagined that the gleam of the fanlight showed exultation in his face.
Lower Burke Street proved to be a line of fine houses lying in the vague borderland between Notting Hill and Kensington.
The particular one at which my cabman pulled up had an air of smug and demure respectability in its old-fashioned iron railings, its massive folding-door, and its shining brasswork.
All was in keeping with a solemn butler who appeared framed in the pink radiance of a tinted electrical light behind him.
My humble name and title did not appear to impress Mr. Culverton Smith. Through the half-open door I heard a high, petulant, penetrating voice.
Who is this person? What does he want? Dear me, Staples, how often have I said that I am not to be disturbed in my hours of study?
Well, I won't see him, Staples. I can't have my work interrupted like this. I am not at home. Say so.
Well, well, give him that message. He can come in the morning, or he can stay away. My work must not be hindered.
I thought of Holmes tossing upon his bed of sickness and counting the minutes, perhaps, until I could bring help to him.
It was not a time to stand upon ceremony. His life depended upon my promptness. Before the apologetic butler had delivered his message I had pushed past him and was in the room.
A high bald head had a small velvet smoking-cap poised coquettishly upon one side of its pink curve. The skull was of enormous capacity, and yet as I looked down I saw to my amazement that the figure of the man was small and frail, twisted in the shoulders and back like one who has suffered from rickets in his childhood.
"What's this?" he cried in a high, screaming voice. "What is the meaning of this intrusion? Didn't I send you word that I would see you to-morrow morning?"
The mention of my friend's name had an extraordinary effect upon the little man. The look of anger passed in an instant from his face.
The man motioned me to a chair, and turned to resume his own. As he did so I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror over the mantelpiece.
I could have sworn that it was set in a malicious and abominable smile. Yet I persuaded myself that it must have been some nervous contraction which I had surprised, for he turned to me an instant later with genuine concern upon his features.
"I am sorry to hear this," said he. "I only know Mr. Holmes through some business dealings which we have had, but I have every respect for his talents and his character.
He is an amateur of crime, as I am of disease. For him the villain, for me the microbe. There are my prisons," he continued, pointing to a row of bottles and jars which stood upon a side table.
Among those gelatine cultivations some of the very worst offenders in the world are now doing time.
It was on account of your special knowledge that Mr. Holmes desired to see you. He has a high opinion of you and thought that you were the one man in London who could help him.
"Oh, that's it-is it?" said he. "I trust the matter is not so grave as you suppose. How long has he been ill?"
Tut, tut! This sounds serious. It would be inhuman not to answer his call. I very much resent any interruption to my work, Dr. Watson, but this case is certainly exceptional.
Very good. I will go alone. I have a note of Mr. Holmes's address. You can rely upon my being there within half an hour at most.
It was with a sinking heart that I reentered Holmes's bedroom. For all that I knew the worst might have happened in my absence.
To my enormous relief, he had improved greatly in the interval. His appearance was as ghastly as ever, but all trace of delirium had left him and he spoke in a feeble voice, it is true, but with even more than his usual crispness and lucidity.
Exactly! Well, Watson, you have done all that a good friend could. You can now disappear from the scene.
Of course you must. But I have reasons to suppose that this opinion would be very much more frank and valuable if he imagines that we are alone.
I fear there is no alternative, Watson. The room does not lend itself to concealment, which is as well, as it is the less likely to arouse suspicion.
But just there, Watson, I fancy that it could be done." Suddenly he sat up with a rigid intentness upon his haggard face.
There are the wheels, Watson. Quick, man, if you love me! And don't budge, whatever happens-whatever happens, do you hear?
Don't speak! Don't move! Just listen with all your ears." Then in an instant his sudden access of strength departed, and his masterful, purposeful talk droned away into the low, vague murmurings of a semi-delirious man.
From the hiding-place into which I had been so swiftly hustled I heard the footfalls upon the stair, with the opening and the closing of the bedroom door.
Then, to my surprise, there came a long silence, broken only by the heavy breathings and gaspings of the sick man.
I could imagine that our visitor was standing by the bedside and looking down at the sufferer. At last that strange hush was broken.
"Holmes!" he cried. "Holmes!" in the insistent tone of one who awakens a sleeper. "Can't you hear me, Holmes?"
You do. You are, fortunately, the only man in London who does. Do you know what is the matter with you?
Well, I shouldn't be surprised, Holmes. I shouldn't be surprised if it were the same. A bad lookout for you if it is.
Singular coincidence, Holmes. Very smart of you to notice it, but rather uncharitable to suggest that it was cause and effect.
Oh, you did, did you? Well, you couldn't prove it, anyhow. But what do you think of yourself spreading reports about me like that, and then crawling to me for help the moment you are in trouble?
You're precious near your end, my friend, but I don't want you to go till I have had a word with you.
That's why I give you water. There, don't slop it about! That's right. Can you understand what I say?
"Do what you can for me. Let bygones be bygones," he whispered. "I'll put the words out of my head-I swear I will.
Well, about Victor Savage's death. You as good as admitted just now that you had done it. I'll forget it.
You can forget it or remember it, just as you like. I don't see you in the witnessbox. Quite another shaped box, my good Holmes, I assure you.
It matters nothing to me that you should know how my nephew died. It's not him we are talking about. It's you.
The fellow who came for me-I've forgotten his name-said that you contracted it down in the East End among the sailors.
You are proud of your brains, Holmes, are you not? Think yourself smart, don't you? You came across someone who was smarter this time.
Yes, I will help you. I'll help you to understand just where you are and how you got there. I'd like you to know before you die.
Painful, is it? Yes, the coolies used to do some squealing towards the end. Takes you as cramp, I fancy.
Well, you can hear what I say, anyhow. Listen now! Can you remember any unusual incident in your life just about the time your symptoms began?
"Listen, Holmes!" There was a sound as if he was shaking the dying man, and it was all that I could do to hold myself quiet in my hiding-place.
You must hear me. You shall hear me. Do you remember a box-an ivory box? It came on Wednesday. You opened it-do you remember?
It was no joke, as you will find to your cost. You fool, you would have it and you have got it. Who asked you to cross my path?
The very one, by George! And it may as well leave the room in my pocket. There goes your last shred of evidence.
But you have the truth now, Holmes, and you can die with the knowledge that I killed you. You knew too much of the fate of Victor Savage, so I have sent you to share it.
"What is that?" said Smith. "Turn up the gas? Ah, the shadows begin to fall, do they? Yes, I will turn it up, that I may see you the better."
He crossed the room and the light suddenly brightened. "Is there any other little service that I can do you, my friend?"
I nearly called out in my joy and my amazement. He was speaking in his natural voice-a little weak, perhaps, but the very voice I knew.
There was a long pause, and I felt that Culverton Smith was standing in silent amazement looking down at his companion.
But it is the tobacco which I find most irksome. Ah, here are some cigarettes." I heard the striking of a match.
"And you might add of the attempted murder of one Sherlock Holmes," remarked my friend with a chuckle.
To save an invalid trouble, Inspector, Mr. Culverton Smith was good enough to give our signal by turning up the gas.
By the way, the prisoner has a small box in the right-hand pocket of his coat which it would be as well to remove.
Thank you. I would handle it gingerly if I were you. Put it down here. It may play its part in the trial.
"You'll only get yourself hurt," said the inspector. "Stand still, will you?" There was the click of the closing handcuffs.
"A nice trap!" cried the high, snarling voice. "It will bring you into the dock, Holmes, not me. He asked me to come here to cure him.
I was sorry for him and I came. Now he will pretend, no doubt, that I have said anything which he may invent which will corroborate his insane suspicions.
"I never needed it more," said Holmes as he refreshed himself with a glass of claret and some biscuits in the intervals of his toilet.
Knowing his vindictive nature, I was perfectly certain that he would come to look upon his handiwork.
Three days of absolute fast does not improve one's beauty, Watson. For the rest, there is nothing which a sponge may not cure.
With vaseline upon one's forehead, belladonna in one's eyes, rouge over the cheek-bones, and crusts of beeswax round one's lips, a very satisfying effect can be produced.
Malingering is a subject upon which I have sometimes thought of writing a monograph. A little occasional talk about half-crowns, oysters, or any other extraneous subject produces a pleasing effect of delirium.
At four yards, I could deceive you. If I failed to do so, who would bring my Smith within my grasp? No, Watson, I would not touch that box.
You can just see if you look at it sideways where the sharp spring like a viper's tooth emerges as you open it.
I dare say it was by some such device that poor Savage, who stood between this monster and a reversion, was done to death.
My correspondence, however, is, as you know, a varied one, and I am somewhat upon my guard against any packages which reach me.
It was clear to me, however, that by pretending that he had really succeeded in his design I might surprise a confession.
That pretence I have carried out with the thoroughness of the true artist. Thank you, Watson, you must help me on with my coat.
When we have finished at the police-station I think that something nutritious at Simpson's would not be out of place.
It was nine o'clock at night upon the second of August-the most terrible August in the history of the world.
One might have thought already that God's curse hung heavy over a degenerate world, for there was an awesome hush and a feeling of vague expectancy in the sultry and stagnant air.
The sun had long set, but one blood-red gash like an open wound lay low in the distant west. Above, the stars were shining brightly, and below, the lights of the shipping glimmered in the bay.
They stood with their heads close together, talking in low, confidential tones. From below the two glowing ends of their cigars might have been the smouldering eyes of some malignant fiend looking down in the darkness.
A remarkable man this Von Bork-a man who could hardly be matched among all the devoted agents of the Kaiser.
One of these was his present companion, Baron Von Herling, the chief secretary of the legation, whose huge 100-horse-power Benz car was blocking the country lane as it waited to waft its owner back to London.
"So far as I can judge the trend of events, you will probably be back in Berlin within the week," the secretary was saying.
When you get there, my dear Von Bork, I think you will be surprised at the welcome you will receive.
I happen to know what is thought in the highest quarters of your work in this country." He was a huge man, the secretary, deep, broad, and tall, with a slow, heavy fashion of speech which had been his main asset in his political career.
"They are not very hard to deceive," he remarked. "A more docile, simple folk could not be imagined."
"I don't know about that," said the other thoughtfully. "They have strange limits and one must learn to observe them.
It is that surface simplicity of theirs which makes a trap for the stranger. One's first impression is that they are entirely soft.
Then one comes suddenly upon something very hard, and you know that you have reached the limit and must adapt yourself to the fact.
It was on my first arrival. I was invited to a week-end gathering at the country house of a cabinet minister.
This, of course, took the trail straight up to me. You've no idea the harm that it did me. There was nothing soft about our British hosts on that occasion, I can assure you.
No, no, don't call it a pose. A pose is an artificial thing. This is quite natural. I am a born sportsman.
Well, that makes it the more effective. You yacht against them, you hunt with them, you play polo, you match them in every game, your four-in-hand takes the prize at Olympia.
I have even heard that you go the length of boxing with the young officers. What is the result? Nobody takes you seriously.
You are a 'good old sport' 'quite a decent fellow for a German,' a hard-drinking, night-club, knock-about-town, devil-may-care young fellow.
And all the time this quiet country house of yours is the centre of half the mischief in England, and the sporting squire the most astute secret-service man in Europe.
You flatter me, Baron. But certainly I may claim my four years in this country have not been unproductive.
The door of the study opened straight on to the terrace. Von Bork pushed it back, and, leading the way, he clicked the switch of the electric light.
He then closed the door behind the bulky form which followed him and carefully adjusted the heavy curtain over the latticed window.
Only when all these precautions had been taken and tested did he turn his sunburned aquiline face to his guest.
"Some of my papers have gone," said he. "When my wife and the household left yesterday for Flushing they took the less important with them.
Your name has already been filed as one of the personal suite. There will be no difficulties for you or your baggage.
Of course, it is just possible that we may not have to go. England may leave France to her fate. We are sure that there is no binding treaty between them.
Von Bork shook his head. "I don't see how that could be. There is a definite treaty there. She could never recover from such a humiliation."
Here and there one hears a question. It is my business to find an answer. Here and there also there is an irritation.
How, then, can England come in, especially when we have stirred her up such a devil's brew of Irish civil war, window-breaking Furies, and God knows what to keep her thoughts at home.
Ah, that is another matter. I fancy that in the future we have our own very definite plans about England, and that your information will be very vital to us.
It is to-day or to-morrow with Mr. John Bull. If he prefers to-day we are perfectly ready. If it is to-morrow we shall be more ready still.
I should think they would be wiser to fight with allies than without them, but that is their own affair.
This week is their week of destiny. But you were speaking of your papers." He sat in the armchair with the light shining upon his broad bald head, while he puffed sedately at his cigar.
The large oak-panelled, book-lined room had a curtain hung in the further corner. When this was drawn it disclosed a large, brass-bound safe.
Von Bork detached a small key from his watch chain, and after some considerable manipulation of the lock he swung open the heavy door.
The light shone vividly into the opened safe, and the secretary of the embassy gazed with an absorbed interest at the rows of stuffed pigeon-holes with which it was furnished.
And all in four years, Baron. Not such a bad show for the hard-drinking, hard-riding country squire.
But the gem of my collection is coming and there is the setting all ready for it." He pointed to a space over which "Naval Signals" was printed.
Out of date and waste paper. The Admiralty in some way got the alarm and every code has been changed.
It was a blow, Baron-the worst setback in my whole campaign. But thanks to my check-book and the good Altamont all will be well to-night.
Well, I really can wait no longer. You can imagine that things are moving at present in Carlton Terrace and that we have all to be at our posts.
You see he poses as a motor expert and I keep a full garage. In our code everything likely to come up is named after some spare part.
If he talks of a radiator it is a battleship, of an oil pump a cruiser, and so on. Sparking plugs are naval signals.
"From Portsmouth at midday," said the secretary, examining the superscription. "By the way, what do you give him?"
I grudge Altamont nothing. He is a wonderful worker. If I pay him well, at least he delivers the goods, to use his own phrase.
Besides he is not a traitor. I assure you that our most pan-Germanic Junker is a sucking dove in his feelings towards England as compared with a real bitter Irish-American.
If you heard him talk you would not doubt it. Sometimes I assure you I can hardly understand him. He seems to have declared war on the King's English as well as on the English king.
What! Tokay!" He indicated a heavily sealed dust-covered bottle which stood with two high glasses upon a salver.
Altamont has a nice taste in wines, and he took a fancy to my Tokay. He is a touchy fellow and needs humouring in small things.
I have to study him, I assure you." They had strolled out on to the terrace again, and along it to the further end where at a touch from the Baron's chauffeur the great car shivered and chuckled.
"Those are the lights of Harwich, I suppose," said the secretary, pulling on his dust coat. "How still and peaceful it all seems.
There may be other lights within the week, and the English coast a less tranquil place! The heavens, too, may not be quite so peaceful if all that the good Zepplin promises us comes true.
Only one window showed a light behind them; in it there stood a lamp, and beside it, seated at a table, was a dear old ruddy-faced woman in a country cap.
She was bending over her knitting and stopping occasionally to stroke a large black cat upon a stool beside her.
"She might almost personify Britannia," said he, "with her complete self-absorption and general air of comfortable somnolence.
Well, au revoir, Von Bork!" With a final wave of his hand he sprang into the car, and a moment later the two golden cones from the headlights shot through the darkness.
The secretary lay back in the cushions of the luxurious limousine, with his thoughts so full of the impending European tragedy that he hardly observed that as his car swung round the village street it nearly passed over a little Ford coming in the opposite direction.
Von Bork walked slowly back to the study when the last gleams of the motor lamps had faded into the distance.
It was a relief to him, however, to think that they were all in safety and that, but for that one old woman who had lingered in the kitchen, he had the whole place to himself.
There was a good deal of tidying up to do inside his study and he set himself to do it until his keen, handsome face was flushed with the heat of the burning papers.
A leather valise stood beside his table, and into this he began to pack very neatly and systematically the precious contents of his safe.
He had hardly got started with the work, however, when his quick ears caught the sounds of a distant car.
Instantly he gave an exclamation of satisfaction, strapped up the valise, shut the safe, locked it, and hurried out on to the terrace.
He was just in time to see the lights of a small car come to a halt at the gate. A passenger sprang out of it and advanced swiftly towards him, while the chauffeur, a heavily built, elderly man with a grey moustache, settled down like one who resigns himself to a long vigil.
Same as I said in my cable. Every last one of them, semaphore, lamp code, Marconi-a copy, mind you, not the original.
That was too dangerous. But it's the real goods, and you can lay to that." He slapped the German upon the shoulder with a rough familiarity from which the other winced.
"Come in," he said. "I'm all alone in the house. I was only waiting for this. Of course a copy is better than the original.
If an original were missing they would change the whole thing. You think it's all safe about the copy?
A half-smoked, sodden cigar hung from the corner of his mouth, and as he sat down he struck a match and relit it.
"Making ready for a move?" he remarked as he looked round him. "Say, mister," he added, as his eyes fell upon the safe from which the curtain was now removed, "you don't tell me you keep your papers in that?"
Gosh, in a wide-open contraption like that! And they reckon you to be some spy. Why, a Yankee crook would be into that with a can-opener.
If I'd known that any letter of mine was goin' to lie loose in a thing like that I'd have been a mug to write to you at all.
"It would puzzle any crook to force that safe," Von Bork answered. "You won't cut that metal with any tool."
"Well, you need a word as well as a set of figures before you can get the lock to work." He rose and showed a double-radiating disc round the keyhole.
So it's not quite as simple as you thought. It was four years ago that I had it made, and what do you think I chose for the word and figures?
Yes, a few of us even then could have guessed the date. Here it is, and I'm shutting down to-morrow morning.
Well, I guess you'll have to fix me up also. I'm not staying in this goldarned country all on my lonesome.
In a week or less, from what I see, John Bull will be on his hind legs and fair ramping. I'd rather watch him from over the water.
Well, so was Jack James an American citizen, but he's doing time in Portland all the same. It cuts no ice with a British copper to tell him you're an American citizen.
'It's British law and order over here,' says he. By the way, mister, talking of Jack James, it seems to me you don't do much to cover your men.
Well, you are their employer, ain't you? It's up to you to see that they don't fall down. But they do fall down, and when did you ever pick them up?
Well, he went a bit woozy towards the end. It's enough to make a man bug-house when he has to play a part from morning to night with a hundred guys all ready to set the coppers wise to him.
Well, they've got him, that's all. They raided his store last night, and he and his papers are all in Portsmouth jail.
You'll go off and he, poor devil, will have to stand the racket, and lucky if he gets off with his life.
Sure thing. My landlady down Fratton way had some inquiries, and when I heard of it I guessed it was time for me to hustle.
But what I want to know, mister, is how the coppers know these things? Steiner is the fifth man you've lost since I signed on with you, and I know the name of the sixth if I don't get a move on.
If I didn't dare things, mister, I wouldn't be in your service. But I'll tell you straight what is in my mind.
I've heard that with you German politicians when an agent has done his work you are not sorry to see him put away.
I don't stand for that, mister, but there's a stool pigeon or a cross somewhere, and it's up to you to find out where it is.
"We have been allies too long to quarrel now at the very hour of victory," he said. "You've done splendid work and taken risks, and I can't forget it.
By all means go to Holland, and you can get a boat from Rotterdam to New York. No other line will be safe a week from now.
The boodle. The reward. The £500. The gunner turned damned nasty at the last, and I had to square him with an extra hundred dollars or it would have been nitsky for you and me.
'Nothin' doin'!' says he, and he meant it, too, but the last hundred did it. It's cost me two hundred pound from first to last, so it isn't likely I'd give it up without gettin' my wad.
Von Bork smiled with some bitterness. "You don't seem to have a very high opinion of my honour," said he, "you want the money before you give up the book."
"All right. Have your way." He sat down at the table and scribbled a check, which he tore from the book, but he refrained from handing it to his companion.
"After all, since we are to be on such terms, Mr. Altamont," said he, "I don't see why I should trust you any more than you trust me.
Do you understand?" he added, looking back over his shoulder at the American. "There's the check upon the table.
The American passed it over without a word. Von Bork undid a winding of string and two wrappers of paper.
Then he sat gazing for a moment in silent amazement at a small blue book which lay before him. Across the cover was printed in golden letters _Practical Handbook of Bee Culture_.
Only for one instant did the master spy glare at this strangely irrelevant inscription. The next he was gripped at the back of his neck by a grasp of iron, and a chloroformed sponge was held in front of his writhing face.
The thickset chauffeur, who had seated himself by the table, pushed forward his glass with some eagerness.
A remarkable wine, Watson. Our friend upon the sofa has assured me that it is from Franz Josef's special cellar at the Schoenbrunn Palace.
The safe was ajar, and Holmes standing in front of it was removing dossier after dossier, swiftly examining each, and then packing it neatly in Von Bork's valise.
The German lay upon the sofa sleeping stertorously with a strap round his upper arms and another round his legs.
We need not hurry ourselves, Watson. We are safe from interruption. Would you mind touching the bell?
There is no one in the house except old Martha, who has played her part to admiration. I got her the situation here when first I took the matter up.
The pleasant old lady had appeared in the doorway. She curtseyed with a smile to Mr. Holmes, but glanced with some apprehension at the figure upon the sofa.
I am glad of that, Mr. Holmes. According to his lights he has been a kind master. He wanted me to go with his wife to Germany yesterday, but that would hardly have suited your plans, would it, sir?
No, indeed, Martha. So long as you were here I was easy in my mind. We waited some time for your signal to-night.
No, indeed. Well, it only meant that we waited half an hour or so until I saw your lamp go out and knew that the coast was clear.
I should not go so far as to say that, Watson. They will at least show our people what is known and what is not.
I may say that a good many of these papers have come through me, and I need not add are thoroughly untrustworthy.
It would brighten my declining years to see a German cruiser navigating the Solent according to the mine-field plans which I have furnished.
But you, Watson"-he stopped his work and took his old friend by the shoulders-"I've hardly seen you in the light yet.
I feel twenty years younger, Holmes. I have seldom felt so happy as when I got your wire asking me to meet you at Harwich with the car.
"These are the sacrifices one makes for one's country, Watson," said Holmes, pulling at his little tuft.
To-morrow it will be but a dreadful memory. With my hair cut and a few other superficial changes I shall no doubt reappear at Claridge's to-morrow as I was before this American stunt-I beg your pardon, Watson, my well of English seems to be permanently defiled-before this American job came my way.
But you have retired, Holmes. We heard of you as living the life of a hermit among your bees and your books in a small farm upon the South Downs.
Alone I did it. Behold the fruit of pensive nights and laborious days when I watched the little working gangs as once I watched the criminal world of London.
Ah, I have often marvelled at it myself. The Foreign Minister alone I could have withstood, but when the Premier also deigned to visit my humble roof-!
The fact is, Watson, that this gentleman upon the sofa was a bit too good for our people. He was in a class by himself.
Things were going wrong, and no one could understand why they were going wrong. Agents were suspected or even caught, but there was evidence of some strong and secret central force.
It was absolutely necessary to expose it. Strong pressure was brought upon me to look into the matter.
Since then I have been honoured by his confidence, which has not prevented most of his plans going subtly wrong and five of his best agents being in prison.
I watched them, Watson, and I picked them as they ripened. Well, sir, I hope that you are none the worse!
The last remark was addressed to Von Bork himself, who after much gasping and blinking had lain quietly listening to Holmes's statement.
He broke out now into a furious stream of German invective, his face convulsed with passion. Holmes continued his swift investigation of documents while his prisoner cursed and swore.
"Though unmusical, German is the most expressive of all languages," he observed when Von Bork had stopped from pure exhaustion.
"Hullo! Hullo!" he added as he looked hard at the corner of a tracing before putting it in the box. "This should put another bird in the cage.
I had no idea that the paymaster was such a rascal, though I have long had an eye upon him. Mister Von Bork, you have a great deal to answer for.
The prisoner had raised himself with some difficulty upon the sofa and was staring with a strange mixture of amazement and hatred at his captor.
"I shall get level with you, Altamont," he said, speaking with slow deliberation. "If it takes me all my life I shall get level with you!"
"The old sweet song," said Holmes. "How often have I heard it in days gone by. It was a favorite ditty of the late lamented Professor Moriarty.
Colonel Sebastian Moran has also been known to warble it. And yet I live and keep bees upon the South Downs.
"Curse you, you double traitor!" cried the German, straining against his bonds and glaring murder from his furious eyes.
"No, no, it is not so bad as that," said Holmes, smiling. "As my speech surely shows you, Mr. Altamont of Chicago had no existence in fact.
It is really immaterial who I am, but since the matter seems to interest you, Mr. Von Bork, I may say that this is not my first acquaintance with the members of your family.
It was I who brought about the separation between Irene Adler and the late King of Bohemia when your cousin Heinrich was the Imperial Envoy.
It was I also who saved from murder, by the Nihilist Klopman, Count Von und Zu Grafenstein, who was your mother's elder brother.
Von Bork groaned and sank back on the sofa. "And most of that information came through you," he cried.
"It is certainly a little untrustworthy," said Holmes. "It will require some checking and you have little time to check it.
Your admiral may find the new guns rather larger than he expects, and the cruisers perhaps a trifle faster.
There are a good many other points of detail which will, no doubt, come to light in good time. But you have one quality which is very rare in a German, Mr.
Von Bork: you are a sportsman and you will bear me no ill-will when you realise that you, who have outwitted so many other people, have at last been outwitted yourself.
After all, you have done your best for your country, and I have done my best for mine, and what could be more natural?
Besides," he added, not unkindly, as he laid his hand upon the shoulder of the prostrate man, "it is better than to fall before some ignoble foe.
These papers are now ready, Watson. If you will help me with our prisoner, I think that we may get started for London at once.
After a short, final struggle he was hoisted, still bound hand and foot, into the spare seat of the little car.
"I trust that you are as comfortable as circumstances permit," said Holmes when the final arrangements were made.
"I suppose you realise, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said he, "that if your government bears you out in this treatment it becomes an act of war."
You are a private individual. You have no warrant for my arrest. The whole proceeding is absolutely illegal and outrageous.
Well, you realise your position, you and your accomplice here. If I were to shout for help as we pass through the village-
My dear sir, if you did anything so foolish you would probably enlarge the two limited titles of our village inns by giving us 'The Dangling Prussian' as a signpost.
The Englishman is a patient creature, but at present his temper is a little inflamed, and it would be as well not to try him too far.
As to you, Watson, you are joining us with your old service, as I understand, so London won't be out of your way.
The two friends chatted in intimate converse for a few minutes, recalling once again the days of the past, while their prisoner vainly wriggled to undo the bonds that held him.
Good old Watson! You are the one fixed point in a changing age. There's an east wind coming all the same, such a wind as never blew on England yet.
Start her up, Watson, for it's time that we were on our way. I have a check for five hundred pounds which should be cashed early, for the drawer is quite capable of stopping it if he can.
Chapter I-The Warning Chapter II-Sherlock Holmes Discourses Chapter III-The Tragedy of Birlstone Chapter IV-Darkness Chapter V-The People of the Drama Chapter VI-A Dawning Light Chapter VII-The Solution
Chapter I-The Man Chapter II-The Bodymaster Chapter III-Lodge 341, Vermissa Chapter IV-The Valley of Fear Chapter V-The Darkest Hour Chapter VI-Danger Chapter VII-The Trapping of Birdy Edwards Epilogue
What's this, Mr. Holmes? Man, it's witchcraft! Where in the name of all that is wonderful did you get those names?
For an instant I could have sworn that the faintest shadow of a smile flickered over the woman's lips.
"Watson, would you be afraid to sleep in the same room with a lunatic." "If your heart is as big as your body, and your soul as fine as your face, then I'd ask for nothing better," said McMurdo.
It was all he could do to keep himself from screaming out. "Oh, Jack, I implore you to give it up!" "Not a sound, for your lives!"
I believe that I am one of the most long-suffering of mortals; but I'll admit that I was annoyed at the sardonic interruption.
Then he took the envelope itself, held it up to the light, and very carefully studied both the exterior and the flap.
"It is Porlock's writing," said he thoughtfully. "I can hardly doubt that it is Porlock's writing, though I have seen it only twice before.
The Greek e with the peculiar top flourish is distinctive. But if it is Porlock, then it must be something of the very first importance.
He was speaking to himself rather than to me; but my vexation disappeared in the interest which the words awakened.
Porlock, Watson, is a nom-de-plume, a mere identification mark; but behind it lies a shifty and evasive personality.
In a former letter he frankly informed me that the name was not his own, and defied me ever to trace him among the teeming millions of this great city.
"A touch! A distinct touch!" cried Holmes. "You are developing a certain unexpected vein of pawky humour, Watson, against which I must learn to guard myself.
But in calling Moriarty a criminal you are uttering libel in the eyes of the law-and there lie the glory and the wonder of it!
The greatest schemer of all time, the organizer of every deviltry, the controlling brain of the underworld, a brain which might have made or marred the destiny of nations-that's the man!
Ah, yes-the so-called Porlock is a link in the chain some little way from its great attachment. Porlock is not quite a sound link-between ourselves.
I cannot doubt that, if we had the cipher, we should find that this communication is of the nature that I indicate.
Again Holmes flattened out the paper upon his unused plate. I rose and, leaning over him, stared down at the curious inscription, which ran as follows:
Because there are many ciphers which I would read as easily as I do the apocrypha of the agony column: such crude devices amuse the intelligence without fatiguing it.
But this is different. It is clearly a reference to the words in a page of some book. Until I am told which page and which book I am powerless.
Your native shrewdness, my dear Watson, that innate cunning which is the delight of your friends, would surely prevent you from inclosing cipher and message in the same envelope.
Should it miscarry, you are undone. As it is, both have to go wrong before any harm comes from it. Our second post is now overdue, and I shall be surprised if it does not bring us either a further letter of explanation, or, as is more probable, the very volume to which these figures refer.
Holmes's calculation was fulfilled within a very few minutes by the appearance of Billy, the page, with the very letter which we were expecting.
"The same writing," remarked Holmes, as he opened the envelope, "and actually signed," he added in an exultant voice as he unfolded the epistle.
Holmes sat for some little time twisting this letter between his fingers, and frowning, as he stared into the fire.
"After all," he said at last, "there may be nothing in it. It may be only his guilty conscience. Knowing himself to be a traitor, he may have read the accusation in the other's eyes."
No less! When any of that party talk about 'He' you know whom they mean. There is one predominant 'He' for all of them.
Hum! That's a large question. When you have one of the first brains of Europe up against you, and all the powers of darkness at his back, there are infinite possibilities.
Anyhow, Friend Porlock is evidently scared out of his senses-kindly compare the writing in the note to that upon its envelope; which was done, he tells us, before this ill-omened visit.
Because he feared I would make some inquiry after him in that case, and possibly bring trouble on him.
"No doubt," said I. "Of course." I had picked up the original cipher message and was bending my brows over it.
It's pretty maddening to think that an important secret may lie here on this slip of paper, and that it is beyond human power to penetrate it.
Sherlock Holmes had pushed away his untasted breakfast and lit the unsavoury pipe which was the companion of his deepest meditations.
"I wonder!" said he, leaning back and staring at the ceiling. "Perhaps there are points which have escaped your Machiavellian intellect.
Let us consider the problem in the light of pure reason. This man's reference is to a book. That is our point of departure.
Let us see then if we can narrow it down. As I focus my mind upon it, it seems rather less impenetrable.
Well, well, it is surely not quite so bad as that. The cipher message begins with a large 534, does it not?
We may take it as a working hypothesis that 534 is the particular page to which the cipher refers. So our book has already become a large book, which is surely something gained.
What other indications have we as to the nature of this large book? The next sign is C2. What do you make of that, Watson?
Hardly that, Watson. You will, I am sure, agree with me that if the page be given, the number of the chapter is immaterial.
Also that if page 534 finds us only in the second chapter, the length of the first one must have been really intolerable.
Brilliant, Watson. You are scintillating this morning. If it is not column, then I am very much deceived.
Surely you do yourself an injustice. One more coruscation, my dear Watson-yet another brain-wave! Had the volume been an unusual one, he would have sent it to me.
Instead of that, he had intended, before his plans were nipped, to send me the clue in this envelope.
He says so in his note. This would seem to indicate that the book is one which he thought I would have no difficulty in finding for myself.
So we have contracted our field of search to a large book, printed in double columns and in common use.
Besides, the editions of Holy Writ are so numerous that he could hardly suppose that two copies would have the same pagination.
This is clearly a book which is standardized. He knows for certain that his page 534 will exactly agree with my page 534.
Exactly. Therein lies our salvation. Our search is narrowed down to standardized books which anyone may be supposed to possess.
There are difficulties, Watson. The vocabulary of Bradshaw is nervous and terse, but limited. The selection of words would hardly lend itself to the sending of general messages.
We will eliminate Bradshaw. The dictionary is, I fear, inadmissible for the same reason. What then is left?
Excellent, Watson! I am very much mistaken if you have not touched the spot. An almanac! Let us consider the claims of Whitaker's Almanac.
It is in common use. It has the requisite number of pages. It is in double column. Though reserved in its earlier vocabulary, it becomes, if I remember right, quite garrulous towards the end.
He picked the volume from his desk. "Here is page 534, column two, a substantial block of print dealing, I perceive, with the trade and resources of British India.
Now let us try again. What does the Mahratta government do? Alas! the next word is 'pig's-bristles.' We are undone, my good Watson!
He had spoken in jesting vein, but the twitching of his bushy eyebrows bespoke his disappointment and irritation.
I sat helpless and unhappy, staring into the fire. A long silence was broken by a sudden exclamation from Holmes, who dashed at a cupboard, from which he emerged with a second yellow-covered volume in his hand.
"We pay the price, Watson, for being too up-to-date!" he cried. "We are before our time, and suffer the usual penalties.
Being the seventh of January, we have very properly laid in the new almanac. It is more than likely that Porlock took his message from the old one.
No doubt he would have told us so had his letter of explanation been written. Now let us see what page 534 has in store for us.
Ha! Ha! Capital! Put that down, Watson. 'There is danger-may-come-very soon-one.' Then we have the name 'Douglas'-'rich-country-now-at Birlstone-House-Birlstone-confidence-is-pressing.'
There, Watson! What do you think of pure reason and its fruit? If the green-grocer had such a thing as a laurel wreath, I should send Billy round for it.
I was staring at the strange message which I had scrawled, as he deciphered it, upon a sheet of foolscap on my knee.
"On the contrary, he has done quite remarkably well," said Holmes. "When you search a single column for words with which to express your meaning, you can hardly expect to get everything you want.
You are bound to leave something to the intelligence of your correspondent. The purport is perfectly clear.
Some deviltry is intended against one Douglas, whoever he may be, residing as stated, a rich country gentleman.
He is sure-'confidence' was as near as he could get to 'confident'-that it is pressing. There is our result-and a very workmanlike little bit of analysis it was!
Holmes had the impersonal joy of the true artist in his better work, even as he mourned darkly when it fell below the high level to which he aspired.
He was still chuckling over his success when Billy swung open the door and Inspector MacDonald of Scotland Yard was ushered into the room.
Those were the early days at the end of the '80's, when Alec MacDonald was far from having attained the national fame which he has now achieved.
He was a young but trusted member of the detective force, who had distinguished himself in several cases which had been intrusted to him.
Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success, his own sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem.
For this reason the affection and respect of the Scotchman for his amateur colleague were profound, and he showed them by the frankness with which he consulted Holmes in every difficulty.
Holmes was not prone to friendship, but he was tolerant of the big Scotchman, and smiled at the sight of him.
"You are an early bird, Mr. Mac," said he. "I wish you luck with your worm. I fear this means that there is some mischief afoot."
"If you said 'hope' instead of 'fear,' it would be nearer the truth, I'm thinking, Mr. Holmes," the inspector answered, with a knowing grin.
The inspector had stopped suddenly, and was staring with a look of absolute amazement at a paper upon the table.
"Douglas!" he stammered. "Birlstone! What's this, Mr. Holmes? Man, it's witchcraft! Where in the name of all that is wonderful did you get those names?"
It is a cipher that Dr. Watson and I have had occasion to solve. But why-what's amiss with the names?
The inspector looked from one to the other of us in dazed astonishment. "Just this," said he, "that Mr. Douglas of Birlstone Manor House was horribly murdered last night!"
It was one of those dramatic moments for which my friend existed. It would be an overstatement to say that he was shocked or even excited by the amazing announcement.
Without having a tinge of cruelty in his singular composition, he was undoubtedly callous from long overstimulation.
Yet, if his emotions were dulled, his intellectual perceptions were exceedingly active. There was no trace then of the horror which I had myself felt at this curt declaration; but his face showed rather the quiet and interested composure of the chemist who sees the crystals falling into position from his oversaturated solution.
Within an hour I learn that this danger has actually materialized and that the person is dead. I am interested; but, as you observe, I am not surprised.
In a few short sentences he explained to the inspector the facts about the letter and the cipher. MacDonald sat with his chin on his hands and his great sandy eyebrows bunched into a yellow tangle.
"I was going down to Birlstone this morning," said he. "I had come to ask you if you cared to come with me-you and your friend here.
MacDonald turned over the letter which Holmes had handed him. "Posted in Camberwell-that doesn't help us much.
Name, you say, is assumed. Not much to go on, certainly. Didn't you say that you have sent him money?
Inspector MacDonald smiled, and his eyelid quivered as he glanced towards me. "I won't conceal from you, Mr. Holmes, that we think in the C.I.D.
Man, you can't but recognize it! After I heard your view I made it my business to see him. I had a chat with him on eclipses.
How the talk got that way I canna think; but he had out a reflector lantern and a globe, and made it all clear in a minute.
He lent me a book; but I don't mind saying that it was a bit above my head, though I had a good Aberdeen upbringing.
He'd have made a grand meenister with his thin face and gray hair and solemn-like way of talking. When he put his hand on my shoulder as we were parting, it was like a father's blessing before you go out into the cold, cruel world.
Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "Great!" he said. "Great! Tell me, Friend MacDonald, this pleasing and touching interview was, I suppose, in the professor's study?"
I don't miss much, Mr. Holmes. Maybe I learned that from you. Yes, I saw the picture-a young woman with her head on her hands, peeping at you sideways.
"Jean Baptiste Greuze," Holmes continued, joining his finger tips and leaning well back in his chair, "was a French artist who flourished between the years 1750 and 1800.
I allude, of course to his working career. Modern criticism has more than indorsed the high opinion formed of him by his contemporaries.
"We are doing so," Holmes interrupted. "All that I am saying has a very direct and vital bearing upon what you have called the Birlstone Mystery.
MacDonald smiled feebly, and looked appealingly to me. "Your thoughts move a bit too quick for me, Mr. Holmes.
You leave out a link or two, and I can't get over the gap. What in the whole wide world can be the connection between this dead painting man and the affair at Birlstone?
"I may remind you," Holmes continued, "that the professor's salary can be ascertained in several trustworthy books of reference.
"Ay, that's remarkable," said the inspector thoughtfully. "Talk away, Mr. Holmes. I'm just loving it.
Holmes smiled. He was always warmed by genuine admiration-the characteristic of the real artist. "What about Birlstone?"
"We've time yet," said the inspector, glancing at his watch. "I've a cab at the door, and it won't take us twenty minutes to Victoria.
But about this picture: I thought you told me once, Mr. Holmes, that you had never met Professor Moriarty.
Ah, that's another matter. I have been three times in his rooms, twice waiting for him under different pretexts and leaving before he came.
Once-well, I can hardly tell about the once to an official detective. It was on the last occasion that I took the liberty of running over his papers-with the most unexpected results.
Absolutely nothing. That was what amazed me. However, you have now seen the point of the picture. It shows him to be a very wealthy man.
How did he acquire wealth? He is unmarried. His younger brother is a station master in the west of England.
Exactly. Of course I have other reasons for thinking so-dozens of exiguous threads which lead vaguely up towards the centre of the web where the poisonous, motionless creature is lurking.
Well, Mr. Holmes, I admit that what you say is interesting: it's more than interesting-it's just wonderful.
But let us have it a little clearer if you can. Is it forgery, coining, burglary-where does the money come from?
Well, the name has a familiar sound. Someone in a novel, was he not? I don't take much stock of detectives in novels-chaps that do things and never let you see how they do them.
Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel. He was a master criminal, and he lived last century-1750 or thereabouts.
Mr. Mac, the most practical thing that you ever did in your life would be to shut yourself up for three months and read twelve hours a day at the annals of crime.
Everything comes in circles-even Professor Moriarty. Jonathan Wild was the hidden force of the London criminals, to whom he sold his brains and his organization on a fifteen per cent.
His chief of staff is Colonel Sebastian Moran, as aloof and guarded and inaccessible to the law as himself.
Six thousand a year. That's paying for brains, you see-the American business principle. I learned that detail quite by chance.
It's more than the Prime Minister gets. That gives you an idea of Moriarty's gains and of the scale on which he works.
Another point: I made it my business to hunt down some of Moriarty's checks lately-just common innocent checks that he pays his household bills with.
Inspector MacDonald had grown steadily more impressed as the conversation proceeded. He had lost himself in his interest.
"He can keep, anyhow," said he. "You've got us side-tracked with your interesting anecdotes, Mr. Holmes.
What really counts is your remark that there is some connection between the professor and the crime. That you get from the warning received through the man Porlock.
We may form some conception as to the motives of the crime. It is, as I gather from your original remarks, an inexplicable, or at least an unexplained, murder.
Now, presuming that the source of the crime is as we suspect it to be, there might be two different motives.
In the first place, I may tell you that Moriarty rules with a rod of iron over his people. His discipline is tremendous.
The other is that it has been engineered by Moriarty in the ordinary course of business. Was there any robbery?
Either is possible. But whichever it may be, or if it is some third combination, it is down at Birlstone that we must seek the solution.
"Then to Birlstone we must go!" cried MacDonald, jumping from his chair. "My word! it's later than I thought.
"And ample for us both," said Holmes, as he sprang up and hastened to change from his dressing gown to his coat.
"All about it" proved to be disappointingly little, and yet there was enough to assure us that the case before us might well be worthy of the expert's closest attention.
He brightened and rubbed his thin hands together as he listened to the meagre but remarkable details.
Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a warmer hue, and his whole eager face shone with an inward light when the call for work reached him.
Leaning forward in the cab, he listened intently to MacDonald's short sketch of the problem which awaited us in Sussex.
The inspector was himself dependent, as he explained to us, upon a scribbled account forwarded to him by the milk train in the early hours of the morning.
White Mason, the local officer, was a personal friend, and hence MacDonald had been notified much more promptly than is usual at Scotland Yard when provincials need their assistance.
"DEAR INSPECTOR MACDONALD," said the letter which he read to us,-"Official requisition for your services is in separate envelope.
This is for your private eye. Wire me what train in the morning you can get for Birlstone, and I will meet it-or have it met if I am too occupied.
This case is a snorter. Don't waste a moment in getting started. If you can bring Mr. Holmes, please do so; for he will find something after his own heart.
We would think the whole had been fixed up for theatrical effect if there wasn't a dead man in the middle of it.
That was in the inclosed official report. It didn't say 'horrible': that's not a recognized official term.
It gave the name John Douglas. It mentioned that his injuries had been in the head, from the discharge of a shotgun.
Then, with your permission, we will leave it at that, Mr. Mac. The temptation to form premature theories upon insufficient data is the bane of our profession.
I can see only two things for certain at present-a great brain in London, and a dead man in Sussex. It's the chain between that we are going to trace.
Only in this way can I make the reader appreciate the people concerned and the strange setting in which their fate was cast.
The village of Birlstone is a small and very ancient cluster of half-timbered cottages on the northern border of the county of Sussex.
These woods are locally supposed to be the extreme fringe of the great Weald forest, which thins away until it reaches the northern chalk downs.
A number of small shops have come into being to meet the wants of the increased population; so there seems some prospect that Birlstone may soon grow from an ancient village into a modern town.
It is the centre for a considerable area of country, since Tunbridge Wells, the nearest place of importance, is ten or twelve miles to the eastward, over the borders of Kent.
About half a mile from the town, standing in an old park famous for its huge beech trees, is the ancient Manor House of Birlstone.
Part of this venerable building dates back to the time of the first crusade, when Hugo de Capus built a fortalice in the centre of the estate, which had been granted to him by the Red King.
This was destroyed by fire in 1543, and some of its smoke-blackened corner stones were used when, in Jacobean times, a brick country house rose upon the ruins of the feudal castle.
The Manor House, with its many gables and its small diamond-paned windows, was still much as the builder had left it in the early seventeenth century.
Of the double moats which had guarded its more warlike predecessor, the outer had been allowed to dry up, and served the humble function of a kitchen garden.
The inner one was still there, and lay forty feet in breadth, though now only a few feet in depth, round the whole house.
A small stream fed it and continued beyond it, so that the sheet of water, though turbid, was never ditchlike or unhealthy.
The only approach to the house was over a drawbridge, the chains and windlass of which had long been rusted and broken.
By thus renewing the custom of the old feudal days the Manor House was converted into an island during the night-a fact which had a very direct bearing upon the mystery which was soon to engage the attention of all England.
The house had been untenanted for some years and was threatening to moulder into a picturesque decay when the Douglases took possession of it.
This family consisted of only two individuals-John Douglas and his wife. Douglas was a remarkable man, both in character and in person.
He was cheery and genial to all, but somewhat offhand in his manners, giving the impression that he had seen life in social strata on some far lower horizon than the county society of Sussex.
He appeared to have plenty of money, which was said to have been gained in the California gold fields, and it was clear from his own talk and that of his wife that he had spent a part of his life in America.
The good impression which had been produced by his generosity and by his democratic manners was increased by a reputation gained for utter indifference to danger.
Though a wretched rider, he turned out at every meet, and took the most amazing falls in his determination to hold his own with the best.
When the vicarage caught fire he distinguished himself also by the fearlessness with which he reentered the building to save property, after the local fire brigade had given it up as impossible.
Thus it came about that John Douglas of the Manor House had within five years won himself quite a reputation in Birlstone.
This mattered the less to her, as she was retiring by disposition, and very much absorbed, to all appearance, in her husband and her domestic duties.
It was known that she was an English lady who had met Mr. Douglas in London, he being at that time a widower.
She was a beautiful woman, tall, dark, and slender, some twenty years younger than her husband; a disparity which seemed in no wise to mar the contentment of their family life.
On a quiet countryside, where all gossip is welcome, this weakness of the lady of the Manor House did not pass without remark, and it bulked larger upon people's memory when the events arose which gave it a very special significance.
Cecil Barker's tall, loose-jointed figure was a familiar one in the main street of Birlstone village; for he was a frequent and welcome visitor at the Manor House.
He was the more noticed as being the only friend of the past unknown life of Mr. Douglas who was ever seen in his new English surroundings.
Barker was himself an undoubted Englishman; but by his remarks it was clear that he had first known Douglas in America and had there lived on intimate terms with him.
"An easy-going, free-handed gentleman," said Ames, the butler. "But, my word! I had rather not be the man that crossed him!"
It was at eleven forty-five that the first alarm reached the small local police station, in charge of Sergeant Wilson of the Sussex Constabulary.
Cecil Barker, much excited, had rushed up to the door and pealed furiously upon the bell. A terrible tragedy had occurred at the Manor House, and John Douglas had been murdered.
That was the breathless burden of his message. He had hurried back to the house, followed within a few minutes by the police sergeant, who arrived at the scene of the crime a little after twelve o'clock, after taking prompt steps to warn the county authorities that something serious was afoot.
On reaching the Manor House, the sergeant had found the drawbridge down, the windows lighted up, and the whole household in a state of wild confusion and alarm.
The white-faced servants were huddling together in the hall, with the frightened butler wringing his hands in the doorway.
Only Cecil Barker seemed to be master of himself and his emotions; he had opened the door which was nearest to the entrance and he had beckoned to the sergeant to follow him.
At that moment there arrived Dr. Wood, a brisk and capable general practitioner from the village. The three men entered the fatal room together, while the horror-stricken butler followed at their heels, closing the door behind him to shut out the terrible scene from the maid servants.
The dead man lay on his back, sprawling with outstretched limbs in the centre of the room. He was clad only in a pink dressing gown, which covered his night clothes.
There were carpet slippers on his bare feet. The doctor knelt beside him and held down the hand lamp which had stood on the table.
One glance at the victim was enough to show the healer that his presence could be dispensed with. The man had been horribly injured.
Lying across his chest was a curious weapon, a shotgun with the barrel sawed off a foot in front of the triggers.
It was clear that this had been fired at close range and that he had received the whole charge in the face, blowing his head almost to pieces.
The country policeman was unnerved and troubled by the tremendous responsibility which had come so suddenly upon him.
"We will touch nothing until my superiors arrive," he said in a hushed voice, staring in horror at the dreadful head.
"Nothing has been touched up to now," said Cecil Barker. "I'll answer for that. You see it all exactly as I found it."
It was just half-past eleven. I had not begun to undress, and I was sitting by the fire in my bedroom when I heard the report.
It was not very loud-it seemed to be muffled. I rushed down-I don't suppose it was thirty seconds before I was in the room.
Yes, it was open. Poor Douglas was lying as you see him. His bedroom candle was burning on the table.
No. I heard Mrs. Douglas coming down the stair behind me, and I rushed out to prevent her from seeing this dreadful sight.
Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, came and took her away. Ames had arrived, and we ran back into the room once more.
Then how could any murderer have got away? It is out of the question! Mr. Douglas must have shot himself.
"That was our first idea. But see!" Barker drew aside the curtain, and showed that the long, diamond-paned window was open to its full extent.
"And look at this!" He held the lamp down and illuminated a smudge of blood like the mark of a boot-sole upon the wooden sill.
Then if you were in the room within half a minute of the crime, he must have been in the water at that very moment.
I have not a doubt of it. I wish to heaven that I had rushed to the window! But the curtain screened it, as you can see, and so it never occurred to me.
Then I heard the step of Mrs. Douglas, and I could not let her enter the room. It would have been too horrible.
"Horrible enough!" said the doctor, looking at the shattered head and the terrible marks which surrounded it.
"But, I say," remarked the police sergeant, whose slow, bucolic common sense was still pondering the open window.
It's all very well your saying that a man escaped by wading this moat, but what I ask you is, how did he ever get into the house at all if the bridge was up?
"I've heard," said the sergeant, "that it was usually raised at sunset. That would be nearer half-past four than six at this time of year."
"Mrs. Douglas had visitors to tea," said Ames. "I couldn't raise it until they went. Then I wound it up myself."
"Then it comes to this," said the sergeant: "If anyone came from outside-_if_ they did-they must have got in across the bridge before six and been in hiding ever since, until Mr. Douglas came into the room after eleven."
That is so! Mr. Douglas went round the house every night the last thing before he turned in to see that the lights were right.
That brought him in here. The man was waiting and shot him. Then he got away through the window and left his gun behind him.
The sergeant picked up a card which lay beside the dead man on the floor. The initials V.V. and under them the number 341 were rudely scrawled in ink upon it.
Barker looked at it with curiosity. "I never noticed it before," he said. "The murderer must have left it behind him."
The sergeant kept turning it over in his big fingers. "What's V.V.? Somebody's initials, maybe. What have you got there, Dr.
It was a good-sized hammer which had been lying on the rug in front of the fireplace-a substantial, workmanlike hammer.
"Mr. Douglas was altering the pictures yesterday," he said. "I saw him myself, standing upon that chair and fixing the big picture above it.
"We'd best put it back on the rug where we found it," said the sergeant, scratching his puzzled head in his perplexity.
It will want the best brains in the force to get to the bottom of this thing. It will be a London job before it is finished.
He raised the hand lamp and walked slowly round the room. "Hullo!" he cried, excitedly, drawing the window curtain to one side.
"Someone had been hiding here, sure enough." He held down the light, and the marks of muddy boots were very visible in the corner.
I'm bound to say this bears out your theory, Mr. Barker. It looks as if the man got into the house after four when the curtains were drawn, and before six when the bridge was raised.
He slipped into this room, because it was the first that he saw. There was no other place where he could hide, so he popped in behind this curtain.
That all seems clear enough. It is likely that his main idea was to burgle the house; but Mr. Douglas chanced to come upon him, so he murdered him and escaped.
"That's how I read it," said Barker. "But, I say, aren't we wasting precious time? Couldn't we start out and scout the country before the fellow gets away?"
There are no trains before six in the morning; so he can't get away by rail. If he goes by road with his legs all dripping, it's odds that someone will notice him.
Anyhow, I can't leave here myself until I am relieved. But I think none of you should go until we see more clearly how we all stand.
The doctor had taken the lamp and was narrowly scrutinizing the body. "What's this mark?" he asked. "Could this have any connection with the crime?"
The dead man's right arm was thrust out from his dressing gown, and exposed as high as the elbow. About halfway up the forearm was a curious brown design, a triangle inside a circle, standing out in vivid relief upon the lard-coloured skin.
"It's not tattooed," said the doctor, peering through his glasses. "I never saw anything like it. The man has been branded at some time as they brand cattle.
"I don't profess to know the meaning of it," said Cecil Barker; "but I have seen the mark on Douglas many times this last ten years."
"And so have I," said the butler. "Many a time when the master has rolled up his sleeves I have noticed that very mark.
"Then it has nothing to do with the crime, anyhow," said the sergeant. "But it's a rum thing all the same.
The butler had given an exclamation of astonishment and was pointing at the dead man's outstretched hand.
Yes, indeed. Master always wore his plain gold wedding ring on the little finger of his left hand. That ring with the rough nugget on it was above it, and the twisted snake ring on the third finger.
Then the murderer, or whoever it was, first took off this ring you call the nugget ring, then the wedding ring, and afterwards put the nugget ring back again.
The worthy country policeman shook his head. "Seems to me the sooner we get London on to this case the better," said he.
White Mason is a smart man. No local job has ever been too much for White Mason. It won't be long now before he is here to help us.
But I expect we'll have to look to London before we are through. Anyhow, I'm not ashamed to say that it is a deal too thick for the likes of me.
At three in the morning the chief Sussex detective, obeying the urgent call from Sergeant Wilson of Birlstone, arrived from headquarters in a light dog-cart behind a breathless trotter.
By the five-forty train in the morning he had sent his message to Scotland Yard, and he was at the Birlstone station at twelve o'clock to welcome us.
White Mason was a quiet, comfortable-looking person in a loose tweed suit, with a clean-shaved, ruddy face, a stoutish body, and powerful bandy legs adorned with gaiters, looking like a small farmer, a retired gamekeeper, or anything upon earth except a very favourable specimen of the provincial criminal officer.
"A real downright snorter, Mr. MacDonald!" he kept repeating. "We'll have the pressmen down like flies when they understand it.
I'm hoping we will get our work done before they get poking their noses into it and messing up all the trails.
There has been nothing like this that I can remember. There are some bits that will come home to you, Mr. Holmes, or I am mistaken.
And you also, Dr. Watson; for the medicos will have a word to say before we finish. Your room is at the Westville Arms.
There's no other place; but I hear that it is clean and good. The man will carry your bags. This way, gentlemen, if you please.
He was a very bustling and genial person, this Sussex detective. In ten minutes we had all found our quarters.
In ten more we were seated in the parlour of the inn and being treated to a rapid sketch of those events which have been outlined in the previous chapter.
MacDonald made an occasional note; while Holmes sat absorbed, with the expression of surprised and reverent admiration with which the botanist surveys the rare and precious bloom.
"Remarkable!" he said, when the story was unfolded, "most remarkable! I can hardly recall any case where the features have been more peculiar."
"I thought you would say so, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason in great delight. "We're well up with the times in Sussex.
I've told you now how matters were, up to the time when I took over from Sergeant Wilson between three and four this morning.
My word! I made the old mare go! But I need not have been in such a hurry, as it turned out; for there was nothing immediate that I could do.
Sergeant Wilson had all the facts. I checked them and considered them and maybe added a few of my own.
Well, I first had the hammer examined. There was Dr. Wood there to help me. We found no signs of violence upon it.
I was hoping that if Mr. Douglas defended himself with the hammer, he might have left his mark upon the murderer before he dropped it on the mat.
"That, of course, proves nothing at all," remarked Inspector MacDonald. "There has been many a hammer murder and no trace on the hammer."
Quite so. It doesn't prove it wasn't used. But there might have been stains, and that would have helped us.
Whoever fixed that up had made up his mind that he was going to take no chances of missing his man. The sawed gun was not more than two foot long-one could carry it easily under one's coat.
There was no complete maker's name; but the printed letters P-E-N were on the fluting between the barrels, and the rest of the name had been cut off by the saw.
White Mason gazed at my friend as the little village practitioner looks at the Harley Street specialist who by a word can solve the difficulties that perplex him.
That is very helpful, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. Wonderful! Wonderful! Do you carry the names of all the gun makers in the world in your memory?
"No doubt it is an American shotgun," White Mason continued. "I seem to have read that a sawed-off shotgun is a weapon used in some parts of America.
Apart from the name upon the barrel, the idea had occurred to me. There is some evidence then, that this man who entered the house and killed its master was an American.
MacDonald shook his head. "Man, you are surely travelling overfast," said he. "I have heard no evidence yet that any stranger was ever in the house at all."
Nothing there that could not have been arranged. Mr. Douglas was an American, or had lived long in America.
So had Mr. Barker. You don't need to import an American from outside in order to account for American doings.
Ten years with Sir Charles Chandos-as solid as a rock. He has been with Douglas ever since he took the Manor House five years ago.
The gun was made to conceal. That's why the barrels were sawed. It would fit into any box. How could he swear there was no such gun in the house?
MacDonald shook his obstinate Scotch head. "I'm not convinced yet that there was ever anyone in the house," said he.
Oh, man, it's just inconceivable! It's clean against common sense! I put it to you, Mr. Holmes, judging it by what we have heard.
The man is not a burglar, supposing that he ever existed. The ring business and the card point to premeditated murder for some private reason.
What weapon would he choose? You would say the most silent in the world. Then he could hope when the deed was done to slip quickly from the window, to wade the moat, and to get away at his leisure.
"Well, you put the case strongly," my friend replied thoughtfully. "It certainly needs a good deal of justification.
May I ask, Mr. White Mason, whether you examined the farther side of the moat at once to see if there were any signs of the man having climbed out from the water?
Ha! Would there be any objection, Mr. White Mason, to our going down to the house at once? There may possibly be some small point which might be suggestive.
I was going to propose it, Mr. Holmes; but I thought it well to put you in touch with all the facts before we go.
"My own idea of the game, at any rate," said Holmes, with a smile. "I go into a case to help the ends of justice and the work of the police.
If I have ever separated myself from the official force, it is because they have first separated themselves from me.
I have no wish ever to score at their expense. At the same time, Mr. White Mason, I claim the right to work in my own way and give my results at my own time-complete rather than in stages.
"I am sure we are honoured by your presence and to show you all we know," said White Mason cordially.
As we approached it, there was the wooden drawbridge and the beautiful broad moat as still and luminous as quicksilver in the cold, winter sunshine.
Three centuries had flowed past the old Manor House, centuries of births and of homecomings, of country dances and of the meetings of fox hunters.
Strange that now in its old age this dark business should have cast its shadow upon the venerable walls!
And yet those strange, peaked roofs and quaint, overhung gables were a fitting covering to grim and terrible intrigue.
As I looked at the deep-set windows and the long sweep of the dull-coloured, water-lapped front, I felt that no more fitting scene could be set for such a tragedy.
"That's the window," said White Mason, "that one on the immediate right of the drawbridge. It's open just as it was found last night."
Well, it wasn't a fat man, anyhow. We don't need your deductions, Mr. Holmes, to tell us that. But you or I could squeeze through all right.
Holmes walked to the edge of the moat and looked across. Then he examined the stone ledge and the grass border beyond it.
"I've had a good look, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason. "There is nothing there, no sign that anyone has landed-but why should he leave any sign?"
We walked across the drawbridge, and were admitted by a quaint, gnarled, dried-up person, who was the butler, Ames.
The poor old fellow was white and quivering from the shock. The village sergeant, a tall, formal, melancholy man, still held his vigil in the room of Fate.
Then you can go home. You've had enough. We can send for you if we want you. The butler had better wait outside.
Tell him to warn Mr. Cecil Barker, Mrs. Douglas, and the housekeeper that we may want a word with them presently.
Now, gentlemen, perhaps you will allow me to give you the views I have formed first, and then you will be able to arrive at your own.
He impressed me, this country specialist. He had a solid grip of fact and a cool, clear, common-sense brain, which should take him some way in his profession.
Holmes listened to him intently, with no sign of that impatience which the official exponent too often produced.
Is it suicide, or is it murder-that's our first question, gentlemen, is it not? If it were suicide, then we have to believe that this man began by taking off his wedding ring and concealing it; that he then came down here in his dressing gown, trampled mud into a corner behind the curtain in order to give the idea someone had waited for him, opened the window, put blood on the-
So I think. Suicide is out of the question. Then a murder has been done. What we have to determine is, whether it was done by someone outside or inside the house.
There are considerable difficulties both ways, and yet one or the other it must be. We will suppose first that some person or persons inside the house did the crime.
Well, then, we are driven back to the theory that it was done by someone from outside. We are still faced with some big difficulties; but anyhow they have ceased to be impossibilities.
The man got into the house between four-thirty and six; that is to say, between dusk and the time when the bridge was raised.
There had been some visitors, and the door was open; so there was nothing to prevent him. He may have been a common burglar, or he may have had some private grudge against Mr. Douglas.
Since Mr. Douglas has spent most of his life in America, and this shotgun seems to be an American weapon, it would seem that the private grudge is the more likely theory.
He slipped into this room because it was the first he came to, and he hid behind the curtain. There he remained until past eleven at night.
At that time Mr. Douglas entered the room. It was a short interview, if there were any interview at all; for Mrs. Douglas declares that her husband had not left her more than a few minutes when she heard the shot.
Exactly. The candle, which was a new one, is not burned more than half an inch. He must have placed it on the table before he was attacked; otherwise, of course, it would have fallen when he fell.
This shows that he was not attacked the instant that he entered the room. When Mr. Barker arrived the candle was lit and the lamp was out.
Well, now, we can reconstruct things on those lines. Mr. Douglas enters the room. He puts down the candle.
A man appears from behind the curtain. He is armed with this gun. He demands the wedding ring-Heaven only knows why, but so it must have been.
Mr. Douglas gave it up. Then either in cold blood or in the course of a struggle-Douglas may have gripped the hammer that was found upon the mat-he shot Douglas in this horrible way.
What does he mean by allowing his retreat to be cut off like that? What does he mean by using a shotgun when silence was his one chance of escape?
Come, Mr. Holmes, it's up to you to give us a lead, since you say Mr. White Mason's theory is unconvincing.
Holmes had sat intently observant during this long discussion, missing no word that was said, with his keen eyes darting to right and to left, and his forehead wrinkled with speculation.
"I should like a few more facts before I get so far as a theory, Mr. Mac," said he, kneeling down beside the body.
Dear me! these injuries are really appalling. Can we have the butler in for a moment?... Ames, I understand that you have often seen this very unusual mark-a branded triangle inside a circle-upon Mr. Douglas's forearm?
It must have caused great pain when it was inflicted. It is undoubtedly a burn. Now, I observe, Ames, that there is a small piece of plaster at the angle of Mr. Douglas's jaw.
"Suggestive!" said Holmes. "It may, of course, be a mere coincidence, or it may point to some nervousness which would indicate that he had reason to apprehend danger.
Ha! The attack may not have been entirely unexpected. We do seem to make a little progress, do we not?
Well, then, we will pass to this card-V.V. 341. It is rough cardboard. Have you any of the sort in the house?
Holmes walked across to the desk and dabbed a little ink from each bottle on to the blotting paper. "It was not printed in this room," he said; "this is black ink and the other purplish.
It was done by a thick pen, and these are fine. No, it was done elsewhere, I should say. Can you make anything of the inscription, Ames?
It gives me the impression of a secret society of some sort; the same with his badge upon the forearm.
And why no arrest? It's past two now. I take it for granted that since dawn every constable within forty miles has been looking out for a wet stranger?
Well, unless he has a burrow close by or a change of clothes ready, they can hardly miss him. And yet they have missed him up to now!
Holmes had gone to the window and was examining with his lens the blood mark on the sill. "It is clearly the tread of a shoe.
It is remarkably broad; a splay-foot, one would say. Curious, because, so far as one can trace any footmark in this mud-stained corner, one would say it was a more shapely sole.
"One dumb-bell-" Holmes said seriously; but his remarks were interrupted by a sharp knock at the door.
A tall, sunburned, capable-looking, clean-shaved man looked in at us. I had no difficulty in guessing that it was the Cecil Barker of whom I had heard.
No such luck. But they've found his bicycle. The fellow left his bicycle behind him. Come and have a look.
We found three or four grooms and idlers standing in the drive inspecting a bicycle which had been drawn out from a clump of evergreens in which it had been concealed.
It was a well used Rudge-Whitworth, splashed as from a considerable journey. There was a saddlebag with spanner and oilcan, but no clue as to the owner.
"It would be a grand help to the police," said the inspector, "if these things were numbered and registered.
But we must be thankful for what we've got. If we can't find where he went to, at least we are likely to get where he came from.
But what in the name of all that is wonderful made the fellow leave it behind? And how in the world has he got away without it?
Then perhaps you would now like to hear the evidence of some of the people in the house. We could use the dining room, Ames.
The butler's account was a simple and a clear one, and he gave a convincing impression of sincerity. He had been engaged five years before, when Douglas first came to Birlstone.
He never saw any signs of apprehension in Mr. Douglas: on the contrary, he was the most fearless man he had ever known.
He ordered the drawbridge to be pulled up every night because it was the ancient custom of the old house, and he liked to keep the old ways up.
Mr. Douglas seldom went to London or left the village; but on the day before the crime he had been shopping at Tunbridge Wells.
He (Ames) had observed some restlessness and excitement on the part of Mr. Douglas that day; for he had seemed impatient and irritable, which was unusual with him.
He had not gone to bed that night; but was in the pantry at the back of the house, putting away the silver, when he heard the bell ring violently.
He heard no shot; but it was hardly possible he would, as the pantry and kitchens were at the very back of the house and there were several closed doors and a long passage between.
The housekeeper had come out of her room, attracted by the violent ringing of the bell. They had gone to the front of the house together.
As they reached the bottom of the stairs he had seen Mrs. Douglas coming down it. No, she was not hurrying; it did not seem to him that she was particularly agitated.
Just as she reached the bottom of the stair Mr. Barker had rushed out of the study. He had stopped Mrs. Douglas and begged her to go back.
"For God's sake, go back to your room!" he cried. "Poor Jack is dead! You can do nothing. For God's sake, go back!"
After some persuasion upon the stairs Mrs. Douglas had gone back. She did not scream. She made no outcry whatever.
The candle was not lit at that time; but the lamp was burning. They had looked out of the window; but the night was very dark and nothing could be seen or heard.
They had then rushed out into the hall, where Ames had turned the windlass which lowered the drawbridge.
The account of Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, was, so far as it went, a corroboration of that of her fellow servant.
The housekeeper's room was rather nearer to the front of the house than the pantry in which Ames had been working.
She was preparing to go to bed when the loud ringing of the bell had attracted her attention. She was a little hard of hearing.
Perhaps that was why she had not heard the shot; but in any case the study was a long way off. She remembered hearing some sound which she imagined to be the slamming of a door.
That was a good deal earlier-half an hour at least before the ringing of the bell. When Mr. Ames ran to the front she went with him.
She saw Mr. Barker, very pale and excited, come out of the study. He intercepted Mrs. Douglas, who was coming down the stairs.
She had therefore taken her to the bedroom, and endeavoured to soothe her. She was greatly excited, trembling all over, but made no other attempt to go downstairs.
She just sat in her dressing gown by her bedroom fire, with her head sunk in her hands. Mrs. Allen stayed with her most of the night.
As to the other servants, they had all gone to bed, and the alarm did not reach them until just before the police arrived.
So far the housekeeper could add nothing on cross-examination save lamentations and expressions of amazement.
Cecil Barker succeeded Mrs. Allen as a witness. As to the occurrences of the night before, he had very little to add to what he had already told the police.
Personally, he was convinced that the murderer had escaped by the window. The bloodstain was conclusive, in his opinion, on that point.
Besides, as the bridge was up, there was no other possible way of escaping. He could not explain what had become of the assassin or why he had not taken his bicycle, if it were indeed his.
He could not possibly have been drowned in the moat, which was at no place more than three feet deep.
In his own mind he had a very definite theory about the murder. Douglas was a reticent man, and there were some chapters in his life of which he never spoke.
They had done very well; but Douglas had suddenly sold out and started for England. He was a widower at that time.
Barker had afterwards realized his money and come to live in London. Thus they had renewed their friendship.
He imagined that some secret society, some implacable organization, was on Douglas's track, which would never rest until it killed him.
Some remarks of his had given him this idea; though he had never told him what the society was, nor how he had come to offend it.
No, I remember his saying that she was of German extraction, and I have seen her portrait. She was a very beautiful woman.
I have heard him talk of Chicago. He knew that city well and had worked there. I have heard him talk of the coal and iron districts.
He liked best to stay and to work at our claim in the mountains. He would never go where other men were if he could help it.
That's why I first thought that someone was after him. Then when he left so suddenly for Europe I made sure that it was so.
I believe that he had a warning of some sort. Within a week of his leaving half a dozen men were inquiring for him.
Well, they were a mighty hard-looking crowd. They came up to the claim and wanted to know where he was.
I told them that he was gone to Europe and that I did not know where to find him. They meant him no good-it was easy to see that.
Well, I don't know about Californians. They were Americans, all right. But they were not miners. I don't know what they were, and was very glad to see their backs.
And then you were together five years in California, so that this business dates back not less than eleven years at the least?
It must be a very serious feud that would be kept up with such earnestness for as long as that. It would be no light thing that would give rise to it.
But if a man had a danger hanging over him, and knew what it was, don't you think he would turn to the police for protection?
Maybe it was some danger that he could not be protected against. There's one thing you should know. He always went about armed.
His revolver was never out of his pocket. But, by bad luck, he was in his dressing gown and had left it in the bedroom last night.
"I should like these dates a little clearer," said MacDonald. "It is quite six years since Douglas left California.
Barker looked sternly at the detective. "I have seen a good deal of him since," he answered. "If I have seen her, it is because you cannot visit a man without knowing his wife.
I imagine nothing, Mr. Barker. I am bound to make every inquiry which can bear upon the case. But I mean no offense.
It's only the facts that we want. It is in your interest and everyone's interest that they should be cleared up.
Barker grew paler, and his great, strong hands were clasped convulsively together. "You have no right to ask such questions!"
You can refuse to answer; but you must be aware that your refusal is in itself an answer, for you would not refuse if you had not something to conceal.
Barker stood for a moment with his face set grimly and his strong black eyebrows drawn low in intense thought.
Then he looked up with a smile. "Well, I guess you gentlemen are only doing your clear duty after all, and I have no right to stand in the way of it.
I'd only ask you not to worry Mrs. Douglas over this matter; for she has enough upon her just now. I may tell you that poor Douglas had just one fault in the world, and that was his jealousy.
He was fond of me-no man could be fonder of a friend. And he was devoted to his wife. He loved me to come here, and was forever sending for me.
More than once I've sworn off coming for that reason, and then he would write me such penitent, imploring letters that I just had to.
But you can take it from me, gentlemen, if it was my last word, that no man ever had a more loving, faithful wife-and I can say also no friend could be more loyal than I!
The man seemed confused and undecided. "When I said 'appears' I meant that it was conceivable that he had himself taken off the ring."
The mere fact that the ring should be absent, whoever may have removed it, would suggest to anyone's mind, would it not, that the marriage and the tragedy were connected?
Barker shrugged his broad shoulders. "I can't profess to say what it means," he answered. "But if you mean to hint that it could reflect in any way upon this lady's honour"-his eyes blazed for an instant, and then with an evident effort he got a grip upon his own emotions-"well, you are on the wrong track, that's all."
"There was one small point," remarked Sherlock Holmes. "When you entered the room there was only a candle lighted on the table, was there not?"
And yet when they arrived they found that the candle was out and that the lamp had been lighted. That seems very remarkable.
Again Barker showed some signs of indecision. "I don't see that it was remarkable, Mr. Holmes," he answered after a pause.
The candle threw a very bad light. My first thought was to get a better one. The lamp was on the table; so I lit it.
Holmes asked no further question, and Barker, with a deliberate look from one to the other of us, which had, as it seemed to me, something of defiance in it, turned and left the room.
Inspector MacDonald had sent up a note to the effect that he would wait upon Mrs. Douglas in her room; but she had replied that she would meet us in the dining room.
She entered now, a tall and beautiful woman of thirty, reserved and self-possessed to a remarkable degree, very different from the tragic and distracted figure I had pictured.
Her sad, appealing eyes travelled from one to the other of us with a curiously inquisitive expression.
"We have taken every possible step, Mrs. Douglas," said the inspector. "You may rest assured that nothing will be neglected."
"Spare no money," she said in a dead, even tone. "It is my desire that every possible effort should be made."
We have heard from Mr. Cecil Barker that you did not actually see-that you were never in the room where the tragedy occurred?
It may have been a couple of minutes. It is so hard to reckon time at such a moment. He implored me not to go on.
He assured me that I could do nothing. Then Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, led me upstairs again. It was all like some dreadful dream.
No, I cannot say. He went from his dressing room, and I did not hear him go. He did the round of the house every night, for he was nervous of fire.
That is just the point which I want to come to, Mrs. Douglas. You have known your husband only in England, have you not?
Mrs. Douglas thought earnestly before she answered. "Yes," she said at last, "I have always felt that there was a danger hanging over him.
He refused to discuss it with me. It was not from want of confidence in me-there was the most complete love and confidence between us-but it was out of his desire to keep all alarm away from me.
Mrs. Douglas's face lit with a quick smile. "Can a husband ever carry about a secret all his life and a woman who loves him have no suspicion of it?
I knew it by his refusal to talk about some episodes in his American life. I knew it by certain precautions he took.
I was so sure of it that for years I have been terrified if ever he came home later than was expected.
"The Valley of Fear," the lady answered. "That was an expression he has used when I questioned him. 'I have been in the Valley of Fear.
I am not out of it yet. '-'Are we never to get out of the Valley of Fear?' I have asked him when I have seen him more serious than usual.
I did; but his face would become very grave and he would shake his head. 'It is bad enough that one of us should have been in its shadow,' he said.
'Please God it shall never fall upon you!' It was some real valley in which he had lived and in which something terrible had occurred to him, of that I am certain; but I can tell you no more.
Yes, he was delirious with fever once when he had his hunting accident three years ago. Then I remember that there was a name that came continually to his lips.
He spoke it with anger and a sort of horror. McGinty was the name-Bodymaster McGinty. I asked him when he recovered who Bodymaster McGinty was, and whose body he was master of.
'Never of mine, thank God!' he answered with a laugh, and that was all I could get from him. But there is a connection between Bodymaster McGinty and the Valley of Fear.
"There is one other point," said Inspector MacDonald. "You met Mr. Douglas in a boarding house in London, did you not, and became engaged to him there?
You have heard, no doubt, that his wedding ring has been taken. Does that suggest anything to you? Suppose that some enemy of his old life had tracked him down and committed this crime, what possible reason could he have for taking his wedding ring?
For an instant I could have sworn that the faintest shadow of a smile flickered over the woman's lips.
"Well, we will not detain you any longer, and we are sorry to have put you to this trouble at such a time," said the inspector.
She rose, and I was again conscious of that quick, questioning glance with which she had just surveyed us.
"What impression has my evidence made upon you?" The question might as well have been spoken. Then, with a bow, she swept from the room.
"She's a beautiful woman-a very beautiful woman," said MacDonald thoughtfully, after the door had closed behind her.
This man Barker has certainly been down here a good deal. He is a man who might be attractive to a woman.
He admits that the dead man was jealous, and maybe he knew best himself what cause he had for jealousy.
Then there's that wedding ring. You can't get past that. The man who tears a wedding ring off a dead man's-What do you say to it, Mr.
My friend had sat with his head upon his hands, sunk in the deepest thought. Now he rose and rang the bell.
Yes, Mr. Holmes. He had a pair of bedroom slippers. I brought him his boots when he went for the police.
Very good, Ames. It is, of course, important for us to know which tracks may be Mr. Barker's and which from outside.
That is natural enough, considering the condition of the room. Very good, Ames. We will ring if we want you.
A few minutes later we were in the study. Holmes had brought with him the carpet slippers from the hall.
"Strange!" murmured Holmes, as he stood in the light of the window and examined them minutely. "Very strange indeed!"
Stooping with one of his quick feline pounces, he placed the slipper upon the blood mark on the sill.
The inspector was transfigured with excitement. His native accent rattled like a stick upon railings.
"Man," he cried, "there's not a doubt of it! Barker has just marked the window himself. It's a good deal broader than any bootmark.
I mind that you said it was a splay-foot, and here's the explanation. But what's the game, Mr. Holmes-what's the game?
White Mason chuckled and rubbed his fat hands together in his professional satisfaction. "I said it was a snorter!"
The three detectives had many matters of detail into which to inquire; so I returned alone to our modest quarters at the village inn.
But before doing so I took a stroll in the curious old-world garden which flanked the house. Rows of very ancient yew trees cut into strange designs girded it round.
Inside was a beautiful stretch of lawn with an old sundial in the middle, the whole effect so soothing and restful that it was welcome to my somewhat jangled nerves.
In that deeply peaceful atmosphere one could forget, or remember only as some fantastic nightmare, that darkened study with the sprawling, bloodstained figure on the floor.
And yet, as I strolled round it and tried to steep my soul in its gentle balm, a strange incident occurred, which brought me back to the tragedy and left a sinister impression in my mind.
I have said that a decoration of yew trees circled the garden. At the end farthest from the house they thickened into a continuous hedge.
On the other side of this hedge, concealed from the eyes of anyone approaching from the direction of the house, there was a stone seat.
As I approached the spot I was aware of voices, some remark in the deep tones of a man, answered by a little ripple of feminine laughter.
An instant later I had come round the end of the hedge and my eyes lit upon Mrs. Douglas and the man Barker before they were aware of my presence.
Her appearance gave me a shock. In the dining-room she had been demure and discreet. Now all pretense of grief had passed away from her.
Her eyes shone with the joy of living, and her face still quivered with amusement at some remark of her companion.
He sat forward, his hands clasped and his forearms on his knees, with an answering smile upon his bold, handsome face.
In an instant-but it was just one instant too late-they resumed their solemn masks as my figure came into view.
I bowed with a coldness which showed, I dare say, very plainly the impression which had been produced upon my mind.
We thought that it was probably you, as your friendship with Mr. Sherlock Holmes is so well known. Would you mind coming over and speaking to Mrs. Douglas for one instant?
I followed him with a dour face. Very clearly I could see in my mind's eye that shattered figure on the floor.
Here within a few hours of the tragedy were his wife and his nearest friend laughing together behind a bush in the garden which had been his.
I greeted the lady with reserve. I had grieved with her grief in the dining room. Now I met her appealing gaze with an unresponsive eye.
"There is no need why Dr. Watson should realize," said Barker quickly. "As he has himself said, it is no possible business of his."
You know Mr. Holmes and his relations with the police better than anyone else can. Supposing that a matter were brought confidentially to his knowledge, is it absolutely necessary that he should pass it on to the detectives?
I beg-I implore that you will, Dr. Watson! I assure you that you will be helping us-helping me greatly if you will guide us on that point.
There was such a ring of sincerity in the woman's voice that for the instant I forgot all about her levity and was moved only to do her will.
"Mr. Holmes is an independent investigator," I said. "He is his own master, and would act as his own judgment directed.
Beyond this I can say nothing, and I would refer you to Mr. Holmes himself if you wanted fuller information.
So saying I raised my hat and went upon my way, leaving them still seated behind that concealing hedge.
I looked back as I rounded the far end of it, and saw that they were still talking very earnestly together, and, as they were gazing after me, it was clear that it was our interview that was the subject of their debate.
No confidences, Watson; for they are mighty awkward if it comes to an arrest for conspiracy and murder.
He was in his most cheerful and debonair humour. "My dear Watson, when I have exterminated that fourth egg I shall be ready to put you in touch with the whole situation.
Dear me, Watson, is it possible that you have not penetrated the fact that the case hangs upon the missing dumb-bell?
Well, well, you need not be downcast; for between ourselves I don't think that either Inspector Mac or the excellent local practitioner has grasped the overwhelming importance of this incident.
One dumb-bell, Watson! Consider an athlete with one dumb-bell! Picture to yourself the unilateral development, the imminent danger of a spinal curvature.
He sat with his mouth full of toast and his eyes sparkling with mischief, watching my intellectual entanglement.
Finally he lit his pipe, and sitting in the inglenook of the old village inn he talked slowly and at random about his case, rather as one who thinks aloud than as one who makes a considered statement.
What were they doing, and why did they not instantly give the alarm? That is the question which faces us, and when it has been answered we shall surely have gone some way to solve our problem.
"I am convinced myself," said I, "that there is an understanding between those two people. She must be a heartless creature to sit laughing at some jest within a few hours of her husband's murder."
Should I ever marry, Watson, I should hope to inspire my wife with some feeling which would prevent her from being walked off by a housekeeper when my corpse was lying within a few yards of her.
It was badly stage-managed; for even the rawest investigators must be struck by the absence of the usual feminine ululation.
If there had been nothing else, this incident alone would have suggested a prearranged conspiracy to my mind.
We will suppose that this couple are united by the bonds of a guilty love, and that they have determined to get rid of the man who stands between them.
It is a large supposition; for discreet inquiry among servants and others has failed to corroborate it in any way.
On the contrary, there is a good deal of evidence that the Douglases were very attached to each other.
Well, at least they gave that impression. However, we will suppose that they are an extraordinarily astute couple, who deceive everyone upon this point, and conspire to murder the husband.
Holmes looked thoughtful. "I see, Watson. You are sketching out a theory by which everything they say from the beginning is false.
According to your idea, there was never any hidden menace, or secret society, or Valley of Fear, or Boss MacSomebody, or anything else.
Well, that is a good sweeping generalization. Let us see what that brings us to. They invent this theory to account for the crime.
They then play up to the idea by leaving this bicycle in the park as proof of the existence of some outsider.
The stain on the windowsill conveys the same idea. So does the card on the body, which might have been prepared in the house.
That all fits into your hypothesis, Watson. But now we come on the nasty, angular, uncompromising bits which won't slip into their places.
Why a cut-off shotgun of all weapons-and an American one at that? How could they be so sure that the sound of it would not bring someone on to them?
It's a mere chance as it is that Mrs. Allen did not start out to inquire for the slamming door. Why did your guilty couple do all this, Watson?
Then again, if a woman and her lover conspire to murder a husband, are they going to advertise their guilt by ostentatiously removing his wedding ring after his death?
And once again, if the thought of leaving a bicycle concealed outside had occurred to you, would it really have seemed worth doing when the dullest detective would naturally say this is an obvious blind, as the bicycle is the first thing which the fugitive needed in order to make his escape.
Before this avenger got away, Barker and the wife had reached the room. The assassin convinced them that any attempt to arrest him would lead to the publication of some hideous scandal.
They were converted to this idea, and preferred to let him go. For this purpose they probably lowered the bridge, which can be done quite noiselessly, and then raised it again.
He made his escape, and for some reason thought that he could do so more safely on foot than on the bicycle.
He therefore left his machine where it would not be discovered until he had got safely away. So far we are within the bounds of possibility, are we not?
They rapidly and rather clumsily met the situation. The mark was put by Barker's bloodstained slipper upon the windowsill to suggest how the fugitive got away.
They obviously were the two who must have heard the sound of the gun; so they gave the alarm exactly as they would have done, but a good half hour after the event.
Well, if there were an outsider, he may be traced and taken. That would be the most effective of all proofs.
But if not-well, the resources of science are far from being exhausted. I think that an evening alone in that study would help me much.
I propose to go up there presently. I have arranged it with the estimable Ames, who is by no means wholehearted about Barker.
I shall sit in that room and see if its atmosphere brings me inspiration. I'm a believer in the genius loci.
You smile, Friend Watson. Well, we shall see. By the way, you have that big umbrella of yours, have you not?
Nothing serious, my dear Watson, or I should certainly ask for your assistance. But I'll take the umbrella.
At present I am only awaiting the return of our colleagues from Tunbridge Wells, where they are at present engaged in trying for a likely owner to the bicycle.
It was nightfall before Inspector MacDonald and White Mason came back from their expedition, and they arrived exultant, reporting a great advance in our investigation.
"Man, I'll admeet that I had my doubts if there was ever an outsider," said MacDonald, "but that's all past now.
We've had the bicycle identified, and we have a description of our man; so that's a long step on our journey.
"It sounds to me like the beginning of the end," said Holmes. "I'm sure I congratulate you both with all my heart."
Well, I started from the fact that Mr. Douglas had seemed disturbed since the day before, when he had been at Tunbridge Wells.
This bicycle and a small valise were his whole belongings. He had registered his name as coming from London, but had given no address.
The valise was London made, and the contents were British; but the man himself was undoubtedly an American.
"Well, well," said Holmes gleefully, "you have indeed done some solid work while I have been sitting spinning theories with my friend!
So little that it was evident that he had carefully guarded himself against identification. There were no papers or letters, and no marking upon the clothes.
A cycle map of the county lay on his bedroom table. He had left the hotel after breakfast yesterday morning on his bicycle, and no more was heard of him until our inquiries.
As it is, he must know that he will be reported to the police by the hotel manager and that his disappearance will be connected with the murder.
So one would imagine. Still, he has been justified of his wisdom up to date, at any rate, since he has not been taken.
He was a man about five foot nine in height, fifty or so years of age, his hair slightly grizzled, a grayish moustache, a curved nose, and a face which all of them described as fierce and forbidding.
"Well, bar the expression, that might almost be a description of Douglas himself," said Holmes. "He is just over fifty, with grizzled hair and moustache, and about the same height.
He was dressed in a heavy gray suit with a reefer jacket, and he wore a short yellow overcoat and a soft cap.
It is less than two feet long. It could very well have fitted into his valise. He could have carried it inside his overcoat without difficulty.
"Well, Mr. Holmes," said MacDonald, "when we have got our man-and you may be sure that I had his description on the wires within five minutes of hearing it-we shall be better able to judge.
But, even as it stands, we have surely gone a long way. We know that an American calling himself Hargrave came to Tunbridge Wells two days ago with bicycle and valise.
In the latter was a sawed-off shotgun; so he came with the deliberate purpose of crime. Yesterday morning he set off for this place on his bicycle, with his gun concealed in his overcoat.
No one saw him arrive, so far as we can learn; but he need not pass through the village to reach the park gates, and there are many cyclists upon the road.
Presumably he at once concealed his cycle among the laurels where it was found, and possibly lurked there himself, with his eye on the house, waiting for Mr. Douglas to come out.
The shotgun is a strange weapon to use inside a house; but he had intended to use it outside, and there it has very obvious advantages, as it would be impossible to miss with it, and the sound of shots is so common in an English sporting neighbourhood that no particular notice would be taken.
Well, Mr. Douglas did not appear. What was he to do next? He left his bicycle and approached the house in the twilight.
He found the bridge down and no one about. He took his chance, intending, no doubt, to make some excuse if he met anyone.
He met no one. He slipped into the first room that he saw, and concealed himself behind the curtain. Thence he could see the drawbridge go up, and he knew that his only escape was through the moat.
He waited until quarter-past eleven, when Mr. Douglas upon his usual nightly round came into the room.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, if this is true, we only tumble out of one mystery into another," said the London inspector.
"And in some ways a worse one," added White Mason. "The lady has never been in America in all her life.
What possible connection could she have with an American assassin which would cause her to shelter him?
"I freely admit the difficulties," said Holmes. "I propose to make a little investigation of my own to-night, and it is just possible that it may contribute something to the common cause."
No, no! Darkness and Dr. Watson's umbrella-my wants are simple. And Ames, the faithful Ames, no doubt he will stretch a point for me.
All my lines of thought lead me back invariably to the one basic question-why should an athletic man develop his frame upon so unnatural an instrument as a single dumb-bell?
It was late that night when Holmes returned from his solitary excursion. We slept in a double-bedded room, which was the best that the little country inn could do for us.
He stood beside me in silence, his candle in his hand. Then the tall, lean figure inclined towards me.
"I say, Watson," he whispered, "would you be afraid to sleep in the same room with a lunatic, a man with softening of the brain, an idiot whose mind has lost its grip?"
Next morning, after breakfast, we found Inspector MacDonald and White Mason seated in close consultation in the small parlour of the local police sergeant.
On the table in front of them were piled a number of letters and telegrams, which they were carefully sorting and docketing.
"Still on the track of the elusive bicyclist?" Holmes asked cheerfully. "What is the latest news of the ruffian?"
He is at present reported from Leicester, Nottingham, Southampton, Derby, East Ham, Richmond, and fourteen other places.
In three of them-East Ham, Leicester, and Liverpool-there is a clear case against him, and he has actually been arrested.
"Dear me!" said Holmes sympathetically. "Now, Mr. Mac and you, Mr. White Mason, I wish to give you a very earnest piece of advice.
Therefore I am here to advise you this morning, and my advice to you is summed up in three words-abandon the case.
But this cyclist. He is not an invention. We have his description, his valise, his bicycle. The fellow must be somewhere.
Yes, yes, no doubt he is somewhere, and no doubt we shall get him; but I would not have you waste your energies in East Ham or Liverpool.
I owe you too much to act otherwise; for in all my experience I cannot recall any more singular and interesting study.
This is clean beyond me, Mr. Holmes. We saw you when we returned from Tunbridge Wells last night, and you were in general agreement with our results.
Well, since you ask me, I spent, as I told you that I would, some hours last night at the Manor House.
Ah, I can only give you a very general answer to that for the moment. By the way, I have been reading a short but clear and interesting account of the old building, purchasable at the modest sum of one penny from the local tobacconist.
Here Holmes drew a small tract, embellished with a rude engraving of the ancient Manor House, from his waistcoat pocket.
It immensely adds to the zest of an investigation, my dear Mr. Mac, when one is in conscious sympathy with the historical atmosphere of one's surroundings.
Don't look so impatient; for I assure you that even so bald an account as this raises some sort of picture of the past in one's mind.
Permit me to give you a sample. 'Erected in the fifth year of the reign of James I, and standing upon the site of a much older building, the Manor House of Birlstone presents one of the finest surviving examples of the moated Jacobean residence-'
Tut, tut, Mr. Mac!-the first sign of temper I have detected in you. Well, I won't read it verbatim, since you feel so strongly upon the subject.
But when I tell you that there is some account of the taking of the place by a parliamentary colonel in 1644, of the concealment of Charles for several days in the course of the Civil War, and finally of a visit there by the second George, you will admit that there are various associations of interest connected with this ancient house.
Is it not? Is it not? Breadth of view, my dear Mr. Mac, is one of the essentials of our profession. The interplay of ideas and the oblique uses of knowledge are often of extraordinary interest.
You will excuse these remarks from one who, though a mere connoisseur of crime, is still rather older and perhaps more experienced than yourself.
"I'm the first to admit that," said the detective heartily. "You get to your point, I admit; but you have such a deuced round-the-corner way of doing it."
Well, well, I'll drop past history and get down to present-day facts. I called last night, as I have already said, at the Manor House.
I did not see either Barker or Mrs. Douglas. I saw no necessity to disturb them; but I was pleased to hear that the lady was not visibly pining and that she had partaken of an excellent dinner.
My visit was specially made to the good Mr. Ames, with whom I exchanged some amiabilities, which culminated in his allowing me, without reference to anyone else, to sit alone for a time in the study.
No, no, everything is now in order. You gave permission for that, Mr. Mac, as I am informed. The room was in its normal state, and in it I passed an instructive quarter of an hour.
Well, not to make a mystery of so simple a matter, I was looking for the missing dumb-bell. It has always bulked rather large in my estimate of the case.
Ah, there we come to the edge of the unexplored. Let me go a little further, a very little further, and I will promise that you shall share everything that I know.
"Well, we're bound to take you on your own terms," said the inspector; "but when it comes to telling us to abandon the case-why in the name of goodness should we abandon the case?"
For the simple reason, my dear Mr. Mac, that you have not got the first idea what it is that you are investigating.
Yes, yes, so you are. But don't trouble to trace the mysterious gentleman upon the bicycle. I assure you that it won't help you.
Well, I'm bound to say I've always found you had reason behind all your queer ways. I'll do what you advise.
The country detective looked helplessly from one to the other. Holmes and his methods were new to him.
"Capital!" said Holmes. "Well, then, I should recommend a nice, cheery country walk for both of you. They tell me that the views from Birlstone Ridge over the Weald are very remarkable.
No doubt lunch could be got at some suitable hostelry; though my ignorance of the country prevents me from recommending one.
"Well, well, spend the day as you like," said Holmes, patting him cheerfully upon the shoulder. "Do what you like and go where you will, but meet me here before dusk without fail-without fail, Mr.
All of it was excellent advice; but I don't insist, so long as you are here when I need you. But now, before we part, I want you to write a note to Mr. Barker.
Now sign that, and send it by hand about four o'clock. At that hour we shall meet again in this room.
Until then we may each do what we like; for I can assure you that this inquiry has come to a definite pause.
Evening was drawing in when we reassembled. Holmes was very serious in his manner, myself curious, and the detectives obviously critical and annoyed.
It is a chill evening, and I do not know how long our expedition may last; so I beg that you will wear your warmest coats.
It is of the first importance that we should be in our places before it grows dark; so with your permission we shall get started at once.
We passed along the outer bounds of the Manor House park until we came to a place where there was a gap in the rails which fenced it.
Through this we slipped, and then in the gathering gloom we followed Holmes until we had reached a shrubbery which lies nearly opposite to the main door and the drawbridge.
The latter had not been raised. Holmes crouched down behind the screen of laurels, and we all three followed his example.
Holmes laughed. "Watson insists that I am the dramatist in real life," said he. "Some touch of the artist wells up within me, and calls insistently for a well-staged performance.
Surely our profession, Mr. Mac, would be a drab and sordid one if we did not sometimes set the scene so as to glorify our results.
At the present moment you thrill with the glamour of the situation and the anticipation of the hunt. Where would be that thrill if I had been as definite as a timetable?
"Well, I hope the pride and justification and the rest of it will come before we all get our death of cold," said the London detective with comic resignation.
We all had good reason to join in the aspiration; for our vigil was a long and bitter one. Slowly the shadows darkened over the long, sombre face of the old house.
A cold, damp reek from the moat chilled us to the bones and set our teeth chattering. There was a single lamp over the gateway and a steady globe of light in the fatal study.
As he spoke the bright, yellow light in the study was obscured by somebody passing to and fro before it.
The laurels among which we lay were immediately opposite the window and not more than a hundred feet from it.
Presently it was thrown open with a whining of hinges, and we could dimly see the dark outline of a man's head and shoulders looking out into the gloom.
For some minutes he peered forth in furtive, stealthy fashion, as one who wishes to be assured that he is unobserved.
Then he leaned forward, and in the intense silence we were aware of the soft lapping of agitated water.
He seemed to be stirring up the moat with something which he held in his hand. Then suddenly he hauled something in as a fisherman lands a fish-some large, round object which obscured the light as it was dragged through the open casement.
We were all upon our feet, staggering after him with our stiffened limbs, while he ran swiftly across the bridge and rang violently at the bell.
There was the rasping of bolts from the other side, and the amazed Ames stood in the entrance. Holmes brushed him aside without a word and, followed by all of us, rushed into the room which had been occupied by the man whom we had been watching.
The oil lamp on the table represented the glow which we had seen from outside. It was now in the hand of Cecil Barker, who held it towards us as we entered.
Holmes took a swift glance round, and then pounced upon a sodden bundle tied together with cord which lay where it had been thrust under the writing table.
This is what we are after, Mr. Barker-this bundle, weighted with a dumb-bell, which you have just raised from the bottom of the moat.
Barker stared at Holmes with amazement in his face. "How in thunder came you to know anything about it?"
We have no less than four witnesses as to who it was who took advantage of the opportunity, and so, Mr. Barker, I think the word lies now with you.
Sherlock Holmes put the sopping bundle upon the table beside the lamp and undid the cord which bound it.
From within he extracted a dumb-bell, which he tossed down to its fellow in the corner. Next he drew forth a pair of boots.
"American, as you perceive," he remarked, pointing to the toes. Then he laid upon the table a long, deadly, sheathed knife.
Finally he unravelled a bundle of clothing, comprising a complete set of underclothes, socks, a gray tweed suit, and a short yellow overcoat.
"The clothes are commonplace," remarked Holmes, "save only the overcoat, which is full of suggestive touches."
He held it tenderly towards the light. "Here, as you perceive, is the inner pocket prolonged into the lining in such fashion as to give ample space for the truncated fowling piece.
I have some recollection, Mr. Barker, that you associated the coal districts with Mr. Douglas's first wife, and it would surely not be too far-fetched an inference that the V.V.
So much is fairly clear. And now, Mr. Barker, I seem to be standing rather in the way of your explanation.
It was a sight to see Cecil Barker's expressive face during this exposition of the great detective. Anger, amazement, consternation, and indecision swept over it in turn.
I have no doubt that I could tell you a great deal more, Mr. Barker; but it would come with a better grace from you.
Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if there's any secret here it is not my secret, and I am not the man to give it away.
"Well, if you take that line, Mr. Barker," said the inspector quietly, "we must just keep you in sight until we have the warrant and can hold you."
The deadlock was broken, however, by a woman's voice. Mrs. Douglas had been standing listening at the half opened door, and now she entered the room.
"You have done enough for now, Cecil," said she. "Whatever comes of it in the future, you have done enough."
Now I am assured that this is not so. At the same time, there is much that is unexplained, and I should strongly recommend that you ask Mr. Douglas to tell us his own story.
Mrs. Douglas turned, and in an instant her arms were round him. Barker had seized his outstretched hand.
He took a good look at us all, and then to my amazement he advanced to me and handed me a bundle of paper.
"I've heard of you," said he in a voice which was not quite English and not quite American, but was altogether mellow and pleasing.
You are the historian of this bunch. Well, Dr. Watson, you've never had such a story as that pass through your hands before, and I'll lay my last dollar on that.
Tell it your own way; but there are the facts, and you can't miss the public so long as you have those.
I've been cooped up two days, and I've spent the daylight hours-as much daylight as I could get in that rat trap-in putting the thing into words.
"That's the past, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes quietly. "What we desire now is to hear your story of the present."
He leaned against the mantelpiece and sucked at the cigar which Holmes had handed him. "I've heard of you, Mr. Holmes.
I never guessed that I should meet you. But before you are through with that," he nodded at my papers, "you will say I've brought you something fresh."
Inspector MacDonald had been staring at the newcomer with the greatest amazement. "Well, this fairly beats me!"
"Ah, Mr. Mac," said Holmes, shaking a reproving forefinger, "you would not read that excellent local compilation which described the concealment of King Charles.
People did not hide in those days without excellent hiding places, and the hiding place that has once been used may be again.
"And how long have you been playing this trick upon us, Mr. Holmes?" said the inspector angrily. "How long have you allowed us to waste ourselves upon a search that you knew to be an absurd one?"
No other conclusion was possible. Therefore I had to determine where Mr. John Douglas himself could be, and the balance of probability was that with the connivance of his wife and his friend he was concealed in a house which had such conveniences for a fugitive, and awaiting quieter times when he could make his final escape.
It was at that instant that the idea came to me. I was fairly dazzled by the brilliance of it. The man's sleeve had slipped up and there was the branded mark of the lodge upon his forearm.
The man whom we had known as Douglas turned up his own coat and cuff to show a brown triangle within a circle exactly like that which we had seen upon the dead man.
I guess you can fill in for yourselves what he did. He opened the window and made the mark on the sill to give an idea of how the murderer escaped.
It was a tall order, that; but as the bridge was up there was no other way. Then, when everything was fixed, he rang the bell for all he was worth.
What happened afterward you know. And so, gentlemen, you can do what you please; but I've told you the truth and the whole truth, so help me God!
The English law is in the main a just law. You will get no worse than your deserts from that, Mr. Douglas.
But I would ask you how did this man know that you lived here, or how to get into your house, or where to hide to get you?
Holmes's face was very white and grave. "The story is not over yet, I fear," said he. "You may find worse dangers than the English law, or even than your enemies from America.
I wish you to journey back some twenty years in time, and westward some thousands of miles in space, that I may lay before you a singular and terrible narrative-so singular and so terrible that you may find it hard to believe that even as I tell it, even so did it occur.
Do not think that I intrude one story before another is finished. As you read on you will find that this is not so.
And when I have detailed those distant events and you have solved this mystery of the past, we shall meet once more in those rooms on Baker Street, where this, like so many other wonderful happenings, will find its end.
It was the fourth of February in the year 1875. It had been a severe winter, and the snow lay deep in the gorges of the Gilmerton Mountains.
From this point the track sweeps downward to Bartons Crossing, Helmdale, and the purely agricultural county of Merton.
It was a single track railroad; but at every siding-and they were numerous-long lines of trucks piled with coal and iron ore told of the hidden wealth which had brought a rude population and a bustling life to this most desolate corner of the United States of America.
The oil lamps had just been lit in the leading passenger car, a long, bare carriage in which some twenty or thirty people were seated.
The greater number of these were workmen returning from their day's toil in the lower part of the valley.
At least a dozen, by their grimed faces and the safety lanterns which they carried, proclaimed themselves miners.
These sat smoking in a group and conversed in low voices, glancing occasionally at two men on the opposite side of the car, whose uniforms and badges showed them to be policemen.
He is a fresh-complexioned, middle-sized young man, not far, one would guess, from his thirtieth year.
He has large, shrewd, humorous gray eyes which twinkle inquiringly from time to time as he looks round through his spectacles at the people about him.
It is easy to see that he is of a sociable and possibly simple disposition, anxious to be friendly to all men.
Anyone could pick him at once as gregarious in his habits and communicative in his nature, with a quick wit and a ready smile.
And yet the man who studied him more closely might discern a certain firmness of jaw and grim tightness about the lips which would warn him that there were depths beyond, and that this pleasant, brown-haired young Irishman might conceivably leave his mark for good or evil upon any society to which he was introduced.
Having made one or two tentative remarks to the nearest miner, and receiving only short, gruff replies, the traveller resigned himself to uncongenial silence, staring moodily out of the window at the fading landscape.
It was not a cheering prospect. Through the growing gloom there pulsed the red glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills.
Great heaps of slag and dumps of cinders loomed up on each side, with the high shafts of the collieries towering above them.
Huddled groups of mean, wooden houses, the windows of which were beginning to outline themselves in light, were scattered here and there along the line, and the frequent halting places were crowded with their swarthy inhabitants.
The iron and coal valleys of the Vermissa district were no resorts for the leisured or the cultured. Everywhere there were stern signs of the crudest battle of life, the rude work to be done, and the rude, strong workers who did it.
The young traveller gazed out into this dismal country with a face of mingled repulsion and interest, which showed that the scene was new to him.
At intervals he drew from his pocket a bulky letter to which he referred, and on the margins of which he scribbled some notes.
Once from the back of his waist he produced something which one would hardly have expected to find in the possession of so mild-mannered a man.
It was a navy revolver of the largest size. As he turned it slantwise to the light, the glint upon the rims of the copper shells within the drum showed that it was fully loaded.
He quickly restored it to his secret pocket, but not before it had been observed by a working man who had seated himself upon the adjoining bench.
I am one of the Eminent Order of Freemen. There's no town without a lodge, and where there is a lodge I'll find my friends.
The remark had a singular effect upon his companion. He glanced round suspiciously at the others in the car.
The miners were still whispering among themselves. The two police officers were dozing. He came across, seated himself close to the young traveller, and held out his hand.
"I see you speak the truth," said the workman. "But it's well to make certain." He raised his right hand to his right eyebrow.
Thank you. I'm Brother John McMurdo, Lodge 29, Chicago. Bodymaster J.H. Scott. But I am in luck to meet a brother so early.
Well, there are plenty of us about. You won't find the order more flourishing anywhere in the States than right here in Vermissa Valley.
But we could do with some lads like you. I can't understand a spry man of the union finding no work to do in Chicago.
McMurdo nodded towards the policemen and smiled. "I guess those chaps would be glad to know," he said.
"It's early days to talk of such things," said McMurdo with the air of a man who had been surprised into saying more than he intended.
I've my own good reasons for leaving Chicago, and let that be enough for you. Who are you that you should take it on yourself to ask such things?
All right, mate, no offense meant. The boys will think none the worse of you, whatever you may have done.
McMurdo took out an envelope and held it close to the murky oil lamp. "Here is the address-Jacob Shafter, Sheridan Street.
Well, I don't know it; but Vermissa is out of my beat. I live at Hobson's Patch, and that's here where we are drawing up.
But, say, there's one bit of advice I'll give you before we part: If you're in trouble in Vermissa, go straight to the Union House and see Boss McGinty.
He is the Bodymaster of Vermissa Lodge, and nothing can happen in these parts unless Black Jack McGinty wants it.
So long, mate! Maybe we'll meet in lodge one of these evenings. But mind my words: If you are in trouble, go to Boss McGinty.
Scanlan descended, and McMurdo was left once again to his thoughts. Night had now fallen, and the flames of the frequent furnaces were roaring and leaping in the darkness.
Against their lurid background dark figures were bending and straining, twisting and turning, with the motion of winch or of windlass, to the rhythm of an eternal clank and roar.
McMurdo turned and saw that one of the policemen had shifted in his seat and was staring out into the fiery waste.
"For that matter," said the other policeman, "I allow that hell must be something like that. If there are worse devils down yonder than some we could name, it's more than I'd expect.
Just this, mister, that I should advise you to be careful in choosing your friends. I don't think I'd begin with Mike Scanlan or his gang if I were you.
"What the hell is it to you who are my friends?" roared McMurdo in a voice which brought every head in the carriage round to witness the altercation.
Did I ask you for your advice, or did you think me such a sucker that I couldn't move without it? You speak when you are spoken to, and by the Lord you'd have to wait a long time if it was me!
The two policemen, heavy, good-natured men, were taken aback by the extraordinary vehemence with which their friendly advances had been rejected.
"No offense, stranger," said one. "It was a warning for your own good, seeing that you are, by your own showing, new to the place."
"I'm new to the place; but I'm not new to you and your kind!" cried McMurdo in cold fury. "I guess you're the same in all places, shoving your advice in when nobody asks for it."
"Maybe we'll see more of you before very long," said one of the patrolmen with a grin. "You're a real hand-picked one, if I am a judge."
There was a murmur of sympathy and admiration from the miners at the dauntless demeanour of the newcomer, while the two policemen shrugged their shoulders and renewed a conversation between themselves.
A few minutes later the train ran into the ill-lit station, and there was a general clearing; for Vermissa was by far the largest town on the line.
McMurdo picked up his leather gripsack and was about to start off into the darkness, when one of the miners accosted him.
"By Gar, mate! you know how to speak to the cops," he said in a voice of awe. "It was grand to hear you.
There was a chorus of friendly "Good-nights" from the other miners as they passed from the platform. Before ever he had set foot in it, McMurdo the turbulent had become a character in Vermissa.
But the town showed a dead level of mean ugliness and squalor. The broad street was churned up by the traffic into a horrible rutted paste of muddy snow.
The sidewalks were narrow and uneven. The numerous gas-lamps served only to show more clearly a long line of wooden houses, each with its veranda facing the street, unkempt and dirty.
As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened by a row of well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster of saloons and gaming houses, in which the miners spent their hard-earned but generous wages.
"That's the Union House," said the guide, pointing to one saloon which rose almost to the dignity of being a hotel.
Good Lord, mister! you are queer, if I must say it without offense. There's only one set of affairs that you'll hear of in these parts, and that's the affairs of the Scowrers.
"Hush, on your life!" cried the miner, standing still in alarm, and gazing in amazement at his companion.
Man, you won't live long in these parts if you speak in the open street like that. Many a man has had the life beaten out of him for less.
"And I'm not saying that you have not read the truth." The man looked nervously round him as he spoke, peering into the shadows as if he feared to see some lurking danger.
Now, that's the house you're after, that one standing back from the street. You'll find old Jacob Shafter that runs it as honest a man as lives in this township.
"I thank you," said McMurdo, and shaking hands with his new acquaintance he plodded, gripsack in hand, up the path which led to the dwelling house, at the door of which he gave a resounding knock.
It was opened at once by someone very different from what he had expected. It was a woman, young and singularly beautiful.
Framed in the bright light of the open doorway, it seemed to McMurdo that he had never seen a more beautiful picture; the more attractive for its contrast with the sordid and gloomy surroundings.
A lovely violet growing upon one of those black slag-heaps of the mines would not have seemed more surprising.
"I thought it was father," said she with a pleasing little touch of a German accent. "Did you come to see him?
McMurdo continued to gaze at her in open admiration until her eyes dropped in confusion before this masterful visitor.
"No, miss," he said at last, "I'm in no hurry to see him. But your house was recommended to me for board.
She laughed at the compliment. "Come right in, sir," she said. "I'm Miss Ettie Shafter, Mr. Shafter's daughter.
My mother's dead, and I run the house. You can sit down by the stove in the front room until father comes along-Ah, here he is!
A heavy, elderly man came plodding up the path. In a few words McMurdo explained his business. A man of the name of Murphy had given him the address in Chicago.
He in turn had had it from someone else. Old Shafter was quite ready. The stranger made no bones about terms, agreed at once to every condition, and was apparently fairly flush of money.
So it was that McMurdo, the self-confessed fugitive from justice, took up his abode under the roof of the Shafters, the first step which was to lead to so long and dark a train of events, ending in a far distant land.
McMurdo was a man who made his mark quickly. Wherever he was the folk around soon knew it. Within a week he had become infinitely the most important person at Shafter's.
There were ten or a dozen boarders there; but they were honest foremen or commonplace clerks from the stores, of a very different calibre from the young Irishman.
Of an evening when they gathered together his joke was always the readiest, his conversation the brightest, and his song the best.
And yet he showed again and again, as he had shown in the railway carriage, a capacity for sudden, fierce anger, which compelled the respect and even the fear of those who met him.
For the law, too, and all who were connected with it, he exhibited a bitter contempt which delighted some and alarmed others of his fellow boarders.
From the first he made it evident, by his open admiration, that the daughter of the house had won his heart from the instant that he had set eyes upon her beauty and her grace.
He was no backward suitor. On the second day he told her that he loved her, and from then onward he repeated the same story with an absolute disregard of what she might say to discourage him.
"Someone else?" he would cry. "Well, the worse luck for someone else! Let him look out for himself! Am I to lose my life's chance and all my heart's desire for someone else?
You can keep on saying no, Ettie: the day will come when you will say yes, and I'm young enough to wait.
He could talk of the sweet valleys of County Monaghan from which he came, of the lovely, distant island, the low hills and green meadows of which seemed the more beautiful when imagination viewed them from this place of grime and snow.
Then he was versed in the life of the cities of the North, of Detroit, and the lumber camps of Michigan, and finally of Chicago, where he had worked in a planing mill.
And afterwards came the hint of romance, the feeling that strange things had happened to him in that great city, so strange and so intimate that they might not be spoken of.
He spoke wistfully of a sudden leaving, a breaking of old ties, a flight into a strange world, ending in this dreary valley, and Ettie listened, her dark eyes gleaming with pity and with sympathy-those two qualities which may turn so rapidly and so naturally to love.
He was reminded of his omission, however, by a visit one evening from Mike Scanlan, the fellow member whom he had met in the train.
Scanlan, the small, sharp-faced, nervous, black-eyed man, seemed glad to see him once more. After a glass or two of whisky he broached the object of his visit.
"Say, McMurdo," said he, "I remembered your address, so I made bold to call. I'm surprised that you've not reported to the Bodymaster.
You must find time for him if you have none for anything else. Good Lord, man! you're a fool not to have been down to the Union House and registered your name the first morning after you came here!
McMurdo showed mild surprise. "I've been a member of the lodge for over two years, Scanlan, but I never heard that duties were so pressing as all that."
You'll tell me that in a month's time. I hear you had a talk with the patrolmen after I left the train.
Scanlan burst out laughing. "You go and see him, my lad," said he as he took his leave. "It's not the police but you that he'll hate if you don't!
It chanced that on the same evening McMurdo had another more pressing interview which urged him in the same direction.
It may have been that his attentions to Ettie had been more evident than before, or that they had gradually obtruded themselves into the slow mind of his good German host; but, whatever the cause, the boarding-house keeper beckoned the young man into his private room and started on the subject without any circumlocution.
"It seems to me, mister," said he, "that you are gettin' set on my Ettie. Ain't that so, or am I wrong?"
Vell, I vant to tell you right now that it ain't no manner of use. There's someone slipped in afore you.
Scowrers! I've heard of them before. It's Scowrers here and Scowrers there, and always in a whisper! What are you all afraid of?
The boarding-house keeper instinctively sank his voice, as everyone did who talked about that terrible society.
You! I vould never have had you in my house if I had known it-not if you vere to pay me a hundred dollar a veek.
Prove it! Are there not fifty murders to prove it? Vat about Milman and Van Shorst, and the Nicholson family, and old Mr. Hyam, and little Billy James, and the others?
"See here!" said McMurdo earnestly. "I want you to take back what you've said, or else make it good. One or the other you must do before I quit this room.
Put yourself in my place. Here am I, a stranger in the town. I belong to a society that I know only as an innocent one.
I can but tell you vat the whole vorld knows, mister. The bosses of the one are the bosses of the other.
If you live here long you vill get your proof. But I forget that you are yourself one of them. You vill soon be as bad as the rest.
McMurdo found himself under sentence of banishment both from his comfortable quarters and from the girl whom he loved.
"Sure, your father is after giving me notice," he said. "It's little I would care if it was just my room, but indeed, Ettie, though it's only a week that I've known you, you are the very breath of life to me, and I can't live without you!"
"Oh, hush, Mr. McMurdo, don't speak so!" said the girl. "I have told you, have I not, that you are too late?
There is another, and if I have not promised to marry him at once, at least I can promise no one else.
McMurdo was down on his knees before her in an instant. "For God's sake, Ettie, let it stand at that!"
A struggle passed for a moment over McMurdo's face; but it ended by setting like granite. "No, here," he said.
I'd never hold my head up again if I felt that I had been driven out. Besides, what is there to be afraid of?
You don't know, Jack. You've been here too short a time. You don't know this Baldwin. You don't know McGinty and his Scowrers.
It's mad on the face of it! If these men, as your father says, have done crime after crime in the valley, and if everyone knows them by name, how comes it that none are brought to justice?
Because no witness dares to appear against them. He would not live a month if he did. Also because they have always their own men to swear that the accused one was far from the scene of the crime.
But surely, Jack, you must have read all this. I had understood that every paper in the United States was writing about it.
Well, I have read something, it is true; but I had thought it was a story. Maybe these men have some reason in what they do.
And that is why I loathe him so. Oh, Jack, now I can tell you the truth. I loathe him with all my heart; but I fear him also.
I fear him for myself; but above all I fear him for father. I know that some great sorrow would come upon us if I dared to say what I really felt.
That is why I have put him off with half-promises. It was in real truth our only hope. But if you would fly with me, Jack, we could take father with us and live forever far from the power of these wicked men.
Again there was the struggle upon McMurdo's face, and again it set like granite. "No harm shall come to you, Ettie-nor to your father either.
McMurdo laughed bitterly. "Good Lord! how little you know of me! Your innocent soul, my darling, could not even guess what is passing in mine.
The door had opened suddenly, and a young fellow came swaggering in with the air of one who is the master.
He was a handsome, dashing young man of about the same age and build as McMurdo himself. Under his broad-brimmed black felt hat, which he had not troubled to remove, a handsome face with fierce, domineering eyes and a curved hawk-bill of a nose looked savagely at the pair who sat by the stove.
Ettie had jumped to her feet full of confusion and alarm. "I'm glad to see you, Mr. Baldwin," said she.
It's a friend of mine, Mr. Baldwin, a new boarder here. Mr. McMurdo, may I introduce you to Mr. Baldwin?
Didn't you? Well, you can understand it now. You can take it from me that this young lady is mine, and you'll find it a very fine evening for a walk.
"Aren't you?" The man's savage eyes were blazing with anger. "Maybe you are in a humour for a fight, Mr.
"For God's sake, Jack! Oh, for God's sake!" cried poor, distracted Ettie. "Oh, Jack, Jack, he will hurt you!"
Oh, Ted, be reasonable-be kind! For my sake, Ted, if ever you loved me, be big-hearted and forgiving!
"I think, Ettie, that if you were to leave us alone we could get this thing settled," said McMurdo quietly.
Or maybe, Mr. Baldwin, you will take a turn down the street with me. It's a fine evening, and there's some open ground beyond the next block.
"I'll get even with you without needing to dirty my hands," said his enemy. "You'll wish you had never set foot in this house before I am through with you!"
"I'll choose my own time, mister. You can leave the time to me. See here!" He suddenly rolled up his sleeve and showed upon his forearm a peculiar sign which appeared to have been branded there.
Well, you will know, I'll promise you that. You won't be much older, either. Perhaps Miss Ettie can tell you something about it.
As to you, Ettie, you'll come back to me on your knees-d'ye hear, girl?-on your knees-and then I'll tell you what your punishment may be.
You've sowed-and by the Lord, I'll see that you reap!" He glanced at them both in fury. Then he turned upon his heel, and an instant later the outer door had banged behind him.
He will have your life. I read it in his horrible eyes. What chance have you against a dozen of them, with Boss McGinty and all the power of the lodge behind them?
McMurdo disengaged her hands, kissed her, and gently pushed her back into a chair. "There, acushla, there!
Don't be disturbed or fear for me. I'm a Freeman myself. I'm after telling your father about it. Maybe I am no better than the others; so don't make a saint of me.
Hate you, Jack? While life lasts I could never do that! I've heard that there is no harm in being a Freeman anywhere but here; so why should I think the worse of you for that?
But if you are a Freeman, Jack, why should you not go down and make a friend of Boss McGinty? Oh, hurry, Jack, hurry!
"I was thinking the same thing," said McMurdo. "I'll go right now and fix it. You can tell your father that I'll sleep here to-night and find some other quarters in the morning."
The bar of McGinty's saloon was crowded as usual; for it was the favourite loafing place of all the rougher elements of the town.
The man was popular; for he had a rough, jovial disposition which formed a mask, covering a great deal which lay behind it.
But apart from this popularity, the fear in which he was held throughout the township, and indeed down the whole thirty miles of the valley and past the mountains on each side of it, was enough in itself to fill his bar; for none could afford to neglect his good will.
Assessments and taxes were enormous; the public works were notoriously neglected, the accounts were slurred over by bribed auditors, and the decent citizen was terrorized into paying public blackmail, and holding his tongue lest some worse thing befall him.
Thus it was that, year by year, Boss McGinty's diamond pins became more obtrusive, his gold chains more weighty across a more gorgeous vest, and his saloon stretched farther and farther, until it threatened to absorb one whole side of the Market Square.
McMurdo pushed open the swinging door of the saloon and made his way amid the crowd of men within, through an atmosphere blurred with tobacco smoke and heavy with the smell of spirits.
The place was brilliantly lighted, and the huge, heavily gilt mirrors upon every wall reflected and multiplied the garish illumination.
There were several bartenders in their shirt sleeves, hard at work mixing drinks for the loungers who fringed the broad, brass-trimmed counter.
He was a black-maned giant, bearded to the cheek-bones, and with a shock of raven hair which fell to his collar.
His complexion was as swarthy as that of an Italian, and his eyes were of a strange dead black, which, combined with a slight squint, gave them a particularly sinister appearance.
All else in the man-his noble proportions, his fine features, and his frank bearing-fitted in with that jovial, man-to-man manner which he affected.
Here, one would say, is a bluff, honest fellow, whose heart would be sound however rude his outspoken words might seem.
It was only when those dead, dark eyes, deep and remorseless, were turned upon a man that he shrank within himself, feeling that he was face to face with an infinite possibility of latent evil, with a strength and courage and cunning behind it which made it a thousand times more deadly.
The young stranger's bold gray eyes looked back fearlessly through their glasses at the deadly black ones which turned sharply upon him.
"Well, it's early days. If your heart is as big as your body, and your soul as fine as your face, then I'd ask for nothing better," said McMurdo.
"By Gar! you've got an Irish tongue in your head anyhow," cried the saloon-keeper, not quite certain whether to humour this audacious visitor or to stand upon his dignity.
Brother Scanlan of Lodge 341, Vermissa. I drink your health Councillor, and to our better acquaintance.
He raised a glass with which he had been served to his lips and elevated his little finger as he drank it.
McGinty, who had been watching him narrowly, raised his thick black eyebrows. "Oh, it's like that, is it?"
A bit closer, Mr. McMurdo; for we don't take folk on trust in these parts, nor believe all we're told neither.
For a couple of minutes he sat in complete silence. McMurdo bore the inspection cheerfully, one hand in his coat pocket, the other twisting his brown moustache.
"See here, my joker," said he, "if I thought you were playing any game on us, it would be short work for you."
"This is a strange welcome," McMurdo answered with some dignity, "for the Bodymaster of a lodge of Freemen to give to a stranger brother."
"Ay, but it's just that same that you have to prove," said McGinty, "and God help you if you fail! Where were you made?"
McGinty opened his eyes. He was not used to being answered in such fashion, and it amused him. "Why won't you tell me?"
See here, mister, you can't expect me, as Bodymaster, to pass into the lodge a man for whose past he can't answer.
"You are right, Councillor," said McMurdo meekly. "I should apologize. I spoke without thought. Well, I know that I am safe in your hands.
McGinty glanced his eyes over the account of the shooting of one Jonas Pinto, in the Lake Saloon, Market Street, Chicago, in the New Year week of 1874.
I was helping Uncle Sam to make dollars. Maybe mine were not as good gold as his, but they looked as well and were cheaper to make.
Well, it means to pass the dollars out into circulation. Then he said he would split. Maybe he did split.
McGinty laughed. "You were first a coiner and then a murderer, and you came to these parts because you thought you'd be welcome."
"You don't say!" McGinty held them to the light in his enormous hand, which was hairy as a gorilla's.
I can see no difference. Gar! you'll be a mighty useful brother, I'm thinking! We can do with a bad man or two among us, Friend McMurdo: for there are times when we have to take our own part.
"It was you, Councillor." McMurdo drew a cocked pistol from the side pocket of his peajacket. "I was covering you all the time.
"By Gar!" McGinty flushed an angry red and then burst into a roar of laughter. "Say, we've had no such holy terror come to hand this many a year.
I reckon the lodge will learn to be proud of you.... Well, what the hell do you want? And can't I speak alone with a gentleman for five minutes but you must butt in on us?
The bartender stood abashed. "I'm sorry, Councillor, but it's Ted Baldwin. He says he must see you this very minute."
The message was unnecessary; for the set, cruel face of the man himself was looking over the servant's shoulder.
"So," said he with a furious glance at McMurdo, "you got here first, did you? I've a word to say to you, Councillor, about this man."
"Tut! Tut!" said McGinty, getting off his barrel. "This will never do. We have a new brother here, Baldwin, and it's not for us to greet him in such fashion.
"I've offered to fight him if he thinks I have wronged him," said McMurdo. "I'll fight him with fists, or, if that won't satisfy him, I'll fight him any other way he chooses.
You would throw over one that has stood by you this five years in favour of a man that you never saw before in your life?
The Councillor sprang at him like a tiger. His hand closed round the other's neck, and he hurled him back across one of the barrels.
McGinty released his hold, and Baldwin, cowed and shaken gasping for breath, and shivering in every limb, as one who has looked over the very edge of death, sat up on the barrel over which he had been hurled.
"You've been asking for it this many a day, Ted Baldwin-now you've got it!" cried McGinty, his huge chest rising and falling.
Maybe you think if I was voted down from Bodymaster you would find yourself in my shoes. It's for the lodge to say that.
"Well, then," cried the other, relapsing in a moment into a bluff joviality, "we are all good friends again and there's an end of the matter."
"See now," he continued, as he filled three high glasses. "Let us drink the quarrelling toast of the lodge.
After that, as you know, there can be no bad blood between us. Now, then the left hand on the apple of my throat.
"There!" cried McGinty, rubbing his hands. "That's the end of the black blood. You come under lodge discipline if it goes further, and that's a heavy hand in these parts, as Brother Baldwin knows-and as you will damn soon find out, Brother McMurdo, if you ask for trouble!"
"Faith, I'd be slow to do that," said McMurdo. He held out his hand to Baldwin. "I'm quick to quarrel and quick to forgive.
Baldwin had to take the proffered hand; for the baleful eye of the terrible Boss was upon him. But his sullen face showed how little the words of the other had moved him.
McGinty clapped them both on the shoulders. "Tut! These girls! These girls!" he cried. "To think that the same petticoats should come between two of my boys!
It's the devil's own luck! Well, it's the colleen inside of them that must settle the question; for it's outside the jurisdiction of a Bodymaster-and the Lord be praised for that!
We have enough on us, without the women as well. You'll have to be affiliated to Lodge 341, Brother McMurdo.
We have our own ways and methods, different from Chicago. Saturday night is our meeting, and if you come then, we'll make you free forever of the Vermissa Valley.
Scanlan, his original acquaintance aboard the train, had occasion shortly afterwards to move into Vermissa, and the two lodged together.
There was no other boarder, and the hostess was an easy-going old Irishwoman who left them to themselves; so that they had a freedom for speech and action welcome to men who had secrets in common.
Shafter had relented to the extent of letting McMurdo come to his meals there when he liked; so that his intercourse with Ettie was by no means broken.
Why, with such a wonderful art at his command, McMurdo should condescend to work at all was a perpetual mystery to his companions; though he made it clear to anyone who asked him that if he lived without any visible means it would very quickly bring the police upon his track.
One policeman was indeed after him already; but the incident, as luck would have it, did the adventurer a great deal more good than harm.
Just at the crowded hour one night, the door opened and a man entered with the quiet blue uniform and peaked cap of the mine police.
There was a hush as he entered, and many a curious glance was cast at him; but the relations between policemen and criminals are peculiar in some parts of the States, and McGinty himself, standing behind his counter, showed no surprise when the policeman enrolled himself among his customers.
"A straight whisky; for the night is bitter," said the police officer. "I don't think we have met before, Councillor?"
That's so. We're looking to you, Councillor, and to the other leading citizens, to help us in upholding law and order in this township.
"We'd do better without you, Captain Marvin," said McGinty coldly; "for we have our own police of the township, and no need for any imported goods.
What are you but the paid tool of the capitalists, hired by them to club or shoot your poorer fellow citizen?
"Well, well, we won't argue about that," said the police officer good-humouredly. "I expect we all do our duty same as we see it; but we can't all see it the same."
He had drunk off his glass and had turned to go, when his eyes fell upon the face of Jack McMurdo, who was scowling at his elbow.
McMurdo shrank away from him. "I was never a friend to you nor any other cursed copper in my life," said he.
"An acquaintance isn't always a friend," said the police captain, grinning. "You're Jack McMurdo of Chicago, right enough, and don't you deny it!"
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "I'm not denying it," said he. "D'ye think I'm ashamed of my own name?"
No, no, Jack, bluster won't do with me. I was an officer in Chicago before ever I came to this darned coal bunker, and I know a Chicago crook when I see one.
Just the same old Teddy Marvin, at your service. We haven't forgotten the shooting of Jonas Pinto up there.
Did you not? That's good impartial evidence, ain't it? Well, his death came in uncommon handy for you, or they would have had you for shoving the queer.
Well, we can let that be bygones; for, between you and me-and perhaps I'm going further than my duty in saying it-they could get no clear case against you, and Chicago's open to you to-morrow.
"It's mum with me so long as I see you living on the straight," said the captain. "But, by the Lord! if you get off after this, it's another story!
He left the bar-room; but not before he had created a local hero. McMurdo's deeds in far Chicago had been whispered before.
He had put off all questions with a smile, as one who did not wish to have greatness thrust upon him.
But now the thing was officially confirmed. The bar loafers crowded round him and shook him heartily by the hand.
He was free of the community from that time on. He could drink hard and show little trace of it; but that evening, had his mate Scanlan not been at hand to lead him home, the feted hero would surely have spent his night under the bar.
In the bare assembly room the men were gathered round a long table. At the side was a second one laden with bottles and glasses, on which some members of the company were already turning their eyes.
To right and left of him were the higher lodge officials, the cruel, handsome face of Ted Baldwin among them.
Among the older men were many whose features showed the tigerish, lawless souls within; but looking at the rank and file it was difficult to believe that these eager and open-faced young fellows were in very truth a dangerous gang of murderers, whose minds had suffered such complete moral perversion that they took a horrible pride in their proficiency at the business, and looked with deepest respect at the man who had the reputation of making what they called "a clean job."
The crime committed, they quarrelled as to who had actually struck the fatal blow, and amused one another and the company by describing the cries and contortions of the murdered man.
In ten long years of outrage there had been no single conviction, and the only danger that ever threatened the Scowrers lay in the victim himself-who, however outnumbered and taken by surprise, might and occasionally did leave his mark upon his assailants.
McMurdo had been warned that some ordeal lay before him; but no one would tell him in what it consisted.
He was led now into an outer room by two solemn brothers. Through the plank partition he could hear the murmur of many voices from the assembly within.
Once or twice he caught the sound of his own name, and he knew that they were discussing his candidacy.
The three of them removed his coat, turned up the sleeve of his right arm, and finally passed a rope round above the elbows and made it fast.
They next placed a thick black cap right over his head and the upper part of his face, so that he could see nothing.
It was pitch dark and very oppressive under his hood. He heard the rustle and murmur of the people round him, and then the voice of McGinty sounded dull and distant through the covering of his ears.
"We know, Brother, by your sign and by your countersign that you are indeed one of us," said McGinty.
We would have you know, however, that in this county and in other counties of these parts we have certain rites, and also certain duties of our own which call for good men.
As the words were said he felt two hard points in front of his eyes, pressing upon them so that it appeared as if he could not move forward without a danger of losing them.
None the less, he nerved himself to step resolutely out, and as he did so the pressure melted away. There was a low murmur of applause.
It was all he could do to keep himself from screaming out, for an agonizing pain shot through his forearm.
He nearly fainted at the sudden shock of it; but he bit his lip and clenched his hands to hide his agony.
This time there was loud applause. A finer first appearance had never been made in the lodge. Hands clapped him on the back, and the hood was plucked from his head.
"One last word, Brother McMurdo," said McGinty. "You have already sworn the oath of secrecy and fidelity, and you are aware that the punishment for any breach of it is instant and inevitable death?"
Then in the name of Lodge 341, Vermissa, I welcome you to its privileges and debates. You will put the liquor on the table, Brother Scanlan, and we will drink to our worthy brother.
McMurdo's coat had been brought to him; but before putting it on he examined his right arm, which still smarted heavily.
There on the flesh of the forearm was a circle with a triangle within it, deep and red, as the branding iron had left it.
When the drinks which followed the ceremony of initiation had all been disposed of, the business of the lodge proceeded.
McMurdo, accustomed only to the prosaic performances of Chicago, listened with open ears and more surprise than he ventured to show to what followed.
You will send two good men, they will be taken charge of by Treasurer Higgins of this lodge, whose address you know.
Windle has never refused us when we have had occasion to ask for the loan of a man or two, and it is not for us to refuse him.
McGinty paused and looked round the room with his dull, malevolent eyes. "Who will volunteer for the job?"
You'll do, Tiger Cormac. If you handle it as well as you did the last, you won't be wrong. And you, Wilson.
It's your first, is it not? Well, you have to be blooded some time. It will be a great start for you.
As to the pistol, you'll find it waiting for you, or I'm mistaken. If you report yourselves on Monday, it will be time enough.
"Any reward this time?" asked Cormac, a thick-set, dark-faced, brutal-looking young man, whose ferocity had earned him the nickname of "Tiger."
Never mind the reward. You just do it for the honour of the thing. Maybe when it is done there will be a few odd dollars at the bottom of the box.
Sure, it's not for the likes of you to ask what the man has done. He has been judged over there. That's no business of ours.
All we have to do is to carry it out for them, same as they would for us. Speaking of that, two brothers from the Merton lodge are coming over to us next week to do some business in this quarter.
Faith, it is wiser not to ask. If you know nothing, you can testify nothing, and no trouble can come of it.
"And time, too!" cried Ted Baldwin. "Folk are gettin' out of hand in these parts. It was only last week that three of our men were turned off by Foreman Blaker.
"The business end of a buckshot cartridge!" cried the man with a loud laugh. "What think you of our ways, Brother?"
McMurdo's criminal soul seemed to have already absorbed the spirit of the vile association of which he was now a member.
McMurdo rose to his feet for an instant. "I would say, Eminent Bodymaster, that if a man should be wanted I should take it as an honour to be chosen to help the lodge."
There was great applause at this. It was felt that a new sun was pushing its rim above the horizon. To some of the elders it seemed that the progress was a little too rapid.
"I would move," said the secretary, Harraway, a vulture-faced old graybeard who sat near the chairman, "that Brother McMurdo should wait until it is the good pleasure of the lodge to employ him."
"Your time will come, Brother," said the chairman. "We have marked you down as a willing man, and we believe that you will do good work in these parts.
You can come to-night, anyhow, and it will help you to know what we stand for in this community. I will make the announcement later.
Meanwhile," he glanced at his agenda paper, "I have one or two more points to bring before the meeting.
First of all, I will ask the treasurer as to our bank balance. There is the pension to Jim Carnaway's widow.
"Jim was shot last month when they tried to kill Chester Wilcox of Marley Creek," McMurdo's neighbour informed him.
"The funds are good at the moment," said the treasurer, with the bankbook in front of him. "The firms have been generous of late.
If I do not hear by Wednesday, their winding gear may get out of order. We had to burn their breaker last year before they became reasonable.
Then the West Section Coaling Company has paid its annual contribution. We have enough on hand to meet any obligations.
By Gar! it was as well that he made a break for it before the note reached us! I guess he won't show his face in this valley again.
An elderly, clean-shaved man with a kindly face and a good brow rose from the end of the table which faced the chairman.
"Mr. Treasurer," he asked, "may I ask who has bought the property of this man that we have driven out of the district?"
And who bought the ironworks of Manson and of Shuman and of Van Deher and of Atwood, which have all been given up of late?
"I don't see, Brother Morris," said the chairman, "that it matters to us who buys them, since they can't carry them out of the district."
With all respect to you, Eminent Bodymaster, I think it may matter very much to us. This process has been going on now for ten long years.
We can take it out of their local bosses; but it only means that others will be sent in their stead. And we are making it dangerous for ourselves.
The small men could not harm us. They had not the money nor the power. So long as we did not squeeze them too dry, they would stay on under our power.
But if these big companies find that we stand between them and their profits, they will spare no pains and no expense to hunt us down and bring us to court.
"It is my advice," the speaker continued, "that we go easier upon the small men. On the day that they have all been driven out the power of this society will have been broken."
Unwelcome truths are not popular. There were angry cries as the speaker resumed his seat. McGinty rose with gloom upon his brow.
"Brother Morris," said he, "you were always a croaker. So long as the members of this lodge stand together there is no power in the United States that can touch them.
Sure, have we not tried it often enough in the lawcourts? I expect the big companies will find it easier to pay than to fight, same as the little companies do.
McMurdo had a fine tenor voice, and if he had failed to gain the good will of the lodge before, it could no longer have been withheld after he had thrilled them with "I'm Sitting on the Stile, Mary," and "On the Banks of Allan Water."
In his very first night the new recruit had made himself one of the most popular of the brethren, marked already for advancement and high office.
There were other qualities needed, however, besides those of good fellowship, to make a worthy Freeman, and of these he was given an example before the evening was over.
The whisky bottle had passed round many times, and the men were flushed and ripe for mischief when their Bodymaster rose once more to address them.
"Boys," said he, "there's one man in this town that wants trimming up, and it's for you to see that he gets it.
I'm speaking of James Stanger of the Herald. You've seen how he's been opening his mouth against us again?
There was a murmur of assent, with many a muttered oath. McGinty took a slip of paper from his waistcoat pocket.
From that day these outrages have never ceased, until now they have reached a pitch which makes us the opprobrium of the civilized world.
Is it for such results as this that our great country welcomes to its bosom the alien who flies from the despotisms of Europe?
The men are known. The organization is patent and public. How long are we to endure it? Can we forever live-' Sure, I've read enough of the slush!
James Stanger is an old man. He is respected in the township and the district. His paper stands for all that is solid in the valley.
If that man is struck down, there will be a stir through this state that will only end with our destruction.
"And how would they bring about our destruction, Mr. Standback?" cried McGinty. "Is it by the police?
Sure, half of them are in our pay and half of them afraid of us. Or is it by the law courts and the judge?
"I have but to raise my finger," cried McGinty, "and I could put two hundred men into this town that would clear it out from end to end."
Then suddenly raising his voice and bending his huge black brows into a terrible frown, "See here, Brother Morris, I have my eye on you, and have had for some time!
You've no heart yourself, and you try to take the heart out of others. It will be an ill day for you, Brother Morris, when your own name comes on our agenda paper, and I'm thinking that it's just there that I ought to place it.
Morris had turned deadly pale, and his knees seemed to give way under him as he fell back into his chair.
He raised his glass in his trembling hand and drank before he could answer. "I apologize, Eminent Bodymaster, to you and to every brother in this lodge if I have said more than I should.
I am a faithful member-you all know that-and it is my fear lest evil come to the lodge which makes me speak in anxious words.
But I have greater trust in your judgment than in my own, Eminent Bodymaster, and I promise you that I will not offend again.
The Bodymaster's scowl relaxed as he listened to the humble words. "Very good, Brother Morris. It's myself that would be sorry if it were needful to give you a lesson.
These editors hang together, and every journal in the state would be crying out for police and troops.
Half a dozen, and two to guard the door. You'll come, Gower, and you, Mansel, and you, Scanlan, and the two Willabys.
Ted Baldwin looked at McMurdo with eyes which showed that he had not forgotten nor forgiven. "Well, he can come if he wants," he said in a surly voice.
The company broke up with shouts and yells and snatches of drunken song. The bar was still crowded with revellers, and many of the brethren remained there.
The little band who had been told off for duty passed out into the street, proceeding in twos and threes along the sidewalk so as not to provoke attention.
It was a bitterly cold night, with a half-moon shining brilliantly in a frosty, star-spangled sky. The men stopped and gathered in a yard which faced a high building.
The words, "Vermissa Herald" were printed in gold lettering between the brightly lit windows. From within came the clanking of the printing press.
"Here, you," said Baldwin to McMurdo, "you can stand below at the door and see that the road is kept open for us.
Arthur Willaby can stay with you. You others come with me. Have no fears, boys; for we have a dozen witnesses that we are in the Union Bar at this very moment.
It was nearly midnight, and the street was deserted save for one or two revellers upon their way home.
The party crossed the road, and, pushing open the door of the newspaper office, Baldwin and his men rushed in and up the stair which faced them.
McMurdo and another remained below. From the room above came a shout, a cry for help, and then the sound of trampling feet and of falling chairs.
He was seized before he could get farther, and his spectacles came tinkling down to McMurdo's feet. There was a thud and a groan.
He was on his face, and half a dozen sticks were clattering together as they fell upon him. He writhed, and his long, thin limbs quivered under the blows.
The others ceased at last; but Baldwin, his cruel face set in an infernal smile, was hacking at the man's head, which he vainly endeavoured to defend with his arms.
His white hair was dabbled with patches of blood. Baldwin was still stooping over his victim, putting in a short, vicious blow whenever he could see a part exposed, when McMurdo dashed up the stair and pushed him back.
Baldwin looked at him in amazement. "Curse you!" he cried. "Who are you to interfere-you that are new to the lodge?
"Stand back yourself!" he cried. "I'll blow your face in if you lay a hand on me. As to the lodge, wasn't it the order of the Bodymaster that the man was not to be killed-and what are you doing but killing him?"
"By Gar! you'd best hurry yourselves!" cried the man below. "The windows are all lighting up, and you'll have the whole town here inside of five minutes."
There was indeed the sound of shouting in the street, and a little group of compositors and pressmen was forming in the hall below and nerving itself to action.
Leaving the limp and motionless body of the editor at the head of the stair, the criminals rushed down and made their way swiftly along the street.
Having reached the Union House, some of them mixed with the crowd in McGinty's saloon, whispering across the bar to the Boss that the job had been well carried through.
Others, and among them McMurdo, broke away into side streets, and so by devious paths to their own homes.
When McMurdo awoke next morning he had good reason to remember his initiation into the lodge. His head ached with the effect of the drink, and his arm, where he had been branded, was hot and swollen.
Having his own peculiar source of income, he was irregular in his attendance at his work; so he had a late breakfast, and remained at home for the morning writing a long letter to a friend.
Afterwards he read the Daily Herald. In a special column put in at the last moment he read, "Outrage at the Herald Office-Editor Seriously Injured."
It was a short account of the facts with which he was himself more familiar than the writer could have been.
The matter is now in the hands of the police; but it can hardly be hoped that their exertions will be attended by any better results than in the past.
Mr. Stanger's many friends will rejoice to hear that, though he has been cruelly and brutally beaten, and though he has sustained severe injuries about the head, there is no immediate danger to his life.
Below it stated that a guard of police, armed with Winchester rifles, had been requisitioned for the defense of the office.
I should wish to speak to you, but would rather not do so in your house. You will find me beside the flagstaff upon Miller Hill.
If you will come there now, I have something which it is important for you to hear and for me to say.
McMurdo read the note twice with the utmost surprise; for he could not imagine what it meant or who was the author of it.
Had it been in a feminine hand, he might have imagined that it was the beginning of one of those adventures which had been familiar enough in his past life.
But it was the writing of a man, and of a well educated one, too. Finally, after some hesitation, he determined to see the matter through.
Miller Hill is an ill-kept public park in the very centre of the town. In summer it is a favourite resort of the people, but in winter it is desolate enough.
From the top of it one has a view not only of the whole straggling, grimy town, but of the winding valley beneath, with its scattered mines and factories blackening the snow on each side of it, and of the wooded and white-capped ranges flanking it.
McMurdo strolled up the winding path hedged in with evergreens until he reached the deserted restaurant which forms the centre of summer gaiety.
Beside it was a bare flagstaff, and underneath it a man, his hat drawn down and the collar of his overcoat turned up.
When he turned his face McMurdo saw that it was Brother Morris, he who had incurred the anger of the Bodymaster the night before.
"I wanted to have a word with you, Mr. McMurdo," said the older man, speaking with a hesitation which showed that he was on delicate ground.
One has to be cautious, mister. One never knows in times like these how a thing may come back to one.
"No, no, not always," cried Morris with vehemence. "Whatever we say, even what we think, seems to go back to that man McGinty."
"Look here!" said McMurdo sternly. "It was only last night, as you know well, that I swore good faith to our Bodymaster.
"If that is the view you take," said Morris sadly, "I can only say that I am sorry I gave you the trouble to come and meet me.
McMurdo, who had been watching his companion very narrowly, relaxed somewhat in his bearing. "Sure I spoke for myself only," said he.
I am a newcomer, as you know, and I am strange to it all. It is not for me to open my mouth, Mr. Morris, and if you think well to say anything to me I am here to hear it.
I would ask you, then, when you joined the Freeman's society in Chicago and swore vows of charity and fidelity, did ever it cross your mind that you might find it would lead you to crime?
"Call it crime!" cried Morris, his voice vibrating with passion. "You have seen little of it if you can call it anything else.
Was it crime last night when a man old enough to be your father was beaten till the blood dripped from his white hairs?
"There are some would say it was war," said McMurdo, "a war of two classes with all in, so that each struck as best it could."
Nor did I when I joined it at Philadelphia. It was just a benefit club and a meeting place for one's fellows.
Then I heard of this place-curse the hour that the name first fell upon my ears!-and I came to better myself!
My God! to better myself! My wife and three children came with me. I started a drygoods store on Market Square, and I prospered well.
The word had gone round that I was a Freeman, and I was forced to join the local lodge, same as you did last night.
I've the badge of shame on my forearm and something worse branded on my heart. I found that I was under the orders of a black villain and caught in a meshwork of crime.
What could I do? Every word I said to make things better was taken as treason, same as it was last night.
I can't get away; for all I have in the world is in my store. If I leave the society, I know well that it means murder to me, and God knows what to my wife and children.
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "You were too soft for the job," said he. "You are the wrong sort for such work."
But I was a criminal then, part sharer in a murder, lost forever in this world, and lost also in the next.
I am a good Catholic; but the priest would have no word with me when he heard I was a Scowrer, and I am excommunicated from my faith.
That's how it stands with me. And I see you going down the same road, and I ask you what the end is to be.
"That's well," said McMurdo. "I'm thinking that you are a weak man and that you make too much of the matter."
Too much! Wait till you have lived here longer. Look down the valley! See the cloud of a hundred chimneys that overshadows it!
I tell you that the cloud of murder hangs thicker and lower than that over the heads of the people. It is the Valley of Fear, the Valley of Death.
The terror is in the hearts of the people from the dusk to the dawn. Wait, young man, and you will learn for yourself.
Well, let it rest at that. I'll bear what you have said in mind, and maybe some day I'll come back to it.
"One word before you go," said Morris. "We may have been seen together. They may want to know what we have spoken about."
And I refuse it. That's our business. Well, so long, Brother Morris, and may you find things go better with you in the future.
That same afternoon, as McMurdo sat smoking, lost in thought beside the stove of his sitting-room, the door swung open and its framework was filled with the huge figure of Boss McGinty.
He passed the sign, and then seating himself opposite to the young man he looked at him steadily for some time, a look which was as steadily returned.
"I'm not much of a visitor, Brother McMurdo," he said at last. "I guess I am too busy over the folk that visit me.
"I'm proud to see you here, Councillor," McMurdo answered heartily, bringing his whisky bottle out of the cupboard.
"Yes, it's worth it," the other answered, "to those that are loyal and go through with it and are a help to the lodge.
The question came so suddenly that it was well that he had his answer prepared. He burst into a hearty laugh.
Morris didn't know I could earn a living here at home. He shan't know either; for he has got too much conscience for the likes of me.
But he's a good-hearted old chap. It was his idea that I was at a loose end, and that he would do me a good turn by offering me a clerkship in a drygoods store.
"It may be enough for most folk; but it ain't enough for me, Councillor," said McMurdo boldly. "If you are a judge of men, you'll know that."
The swarthy giant glared at him, and his hairy paw closed for an instant round the glass as though he would hurl it at the head of his companion.
"You're a queer card, for sure," said he. "Well, if you want reasons, I'll give them. Did Morris say nothing to you against the lodge?"
Well, that's because he daren't trust you. But in his heart he is not a loyal brother. We know that well.
So we watch him and we wait for the time to admonish him. I'm thinking that the time is drawing near.
There's no room for scabby sheep in our pen. But if you keep company with a disloyal man, we might think that you were disloyal, too.
"There's no chance of my keeping company with him; for I dislike the man," McMurdo answered. "As to being disloyal, if it was any man but you he would not use the word to me twice."
"Well, that's enough," said McGinty, draining off his glass. "I came down to give you a word in season, and you've had it."
McGinty laughed. "It's my business to know what goes on in this township," said he. "I guess you'd best reckon on my hearing all that passes.
But his leavetaking was cut short in a very unexpected fashion. With a sudden crash the door flew open, and three frowning, intent faces glared in at them from under the peaks of police caps.
McMurdo sprang to his feet and half drew his revolver; but his arm stopped midway as he became conscious that two Winchester rifles were levelled at his head.
A man in uniform advanced into the room, a six-shooter in his hand. It was Captain Marvin, once of Chicago, and now of the Mine Constabulary.
"I thought you'd be getting into trouble, Mr. Crooked McMurdo of Chicago," said he. "Can't keep out of it, can you?
"I guess you'll pay for this, Captain Marvin," said McGinty. "Who are you, I'd like to know, to break into a house in this fashion and molest honest, law-abiding men?"
"You're standing out in this deal, Councillor McGinty," said the police captain. "We are not out after you, but after this man McMurdo.
"By all accounts, Mr. McGinty, you may have to answer for your own conduct some of these days," the captain answered.
This man McMurdo was a crook before ever he came here, and he's a crook still. Cover him, Patrolman, while I disarm him.
"There's my pistol," said McMurdo coolly. "Maybe, Captain Marvin, if you and I were alone and face to face you would not take me so easily."
"Where's your warrant?" asked McGinty. "By Gar! a man might as well live in Russia as in Vermissa while folk like you are running the police.
Of being concerned in the beating of old Editor Stanger at the Herald office. It wasn't your fault that it isn't a murder charge.
"Well, if that's all you have against him," cried McGinty with a laugh, "you can save yourself a deal of trouble by dropping it right now.
This man was with me in my saloon playing poker up to midnight, and I can bring a dozen to prove it.
That's your affair, and I guess you can settle it in court to-morrow. Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and come quietly if you don't want a gun across your head.
So determined was the appearance of the captain that both McMurdo and his boss were forced to accept the situation.
"I'll bid you good-bye," said the Boss, shaking hands. "I'll see Reilly the lawyer and take the defense upon myself.
I wouldn't bet on that. Guard the prisoner, you two, and shoot him if he tries any games. I'll search the house before I leave.
He did so; but apparently found no trace of the concealed plant. When he had descended he and his men escorted McMurdo to headquarters.
Darkness had fallen, and a keen blizzard was blowing so that the streets were nearly deserted; but a few loiterers followed the group, and emboldened by invisibility shouted imprecations at the prisoner.
"Lynch the cursed Scowrer!" they cried. "Lynch him!" They laughed and jeered as he was pushed into the police station.
After a short, formal examination from the inspector in charge he was put into the common cell. Here he found Baldwin and three other criminals of the night before, all arrested that afternoon and waiting their trial next morning.
Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. The magistrate could not possibly, on the evidence, have held them for a higher court.
Cross examined by the clever attorney who had been engaged by McGinty, they were even more nebulous in their evidence.
The injured man had already deposed that he was so taken by surprise by the suddenness of the attack that he could state nothing beyond the fact that the first man who struck him wore a moustache.
He added that he knew them to be Scowrers, since no one else in the community could possibly have any enmity to him, and he had long been threatened on account of his outspoken editorials.
On the other hand, it was clearly shown by the united and unfaltering evidence of six citizens, including that high municipal official, Councillor McGinty, that the men had been at a card party at the Union House until an hour very much later than the commission of the outrage.
Needless to say that they were discharged with something very near to an apology from the bench for the inconvenience to which they had been put, together with an implied censure of Captain Marvin and the police for their officious zeal.
The verdict was greeted with loud applause by a court in which McMurdo saw many familiar faces. Brothers of the lodge smiled and waved.
But there were others who sat with compressed lips and brooding eyes as the men filed out of the dock.
One of them, a little, dark-bearded, resolute fellow, put the thoughts of himself and comrades into words as the ex-prisoners passed him.
If anything had been needed to give an impetus to Jack McMurdo's popularity among his fellows it would have been his arrest and acquittal.
That a man on the very night of joining the lodge should have done something which brought him before the magistrate was a new record in the annals of the society.
Already he had earned the reputation of a good boon companion, a cheery reveller, and withal a man of high temper, who would not take an insult even from the all-powerful Boss himself.
"He'll be the boy for the clean job," said the oldsters to one another, and waited their time until they could set him to his work.
McGinty had instruments enough already; but he recognized that this was a supremely able one. He felt like a man holding a fierce bloodhound in leash.
There were curs to do the smaller work; but some day he would slip this creature upon its prey. A few members of the lodge, Ted Baldwin among them, resented the rapid rise of the stranger and hated him for it; but they kept clear of him, for he was as ready to fight as to laugh.
But if he gained favour with his fellows, there was another quarter, one which had become even more vital to him, in which he lost it.
Ettie Shafter's father would have nothing more to do with him, nor would he allow him to enter the house.
Ettie herself was too deeply in love to give him up altogether, and yet her own good sense warned her of what would come from a marriage with a man who was regarded as a criminal.
One morning after a sleepless night she determined to see him, possibly for the last time, and make one strong endeavour to draw him from those evil influences which were sucking him down.
She went to his house, as he had often begged her to do, and made her way into the room which he used as his sitting-room.
He was seated at a table, with his back turned and a letter in front of him. A sudden spirit of girlish mischief came over her-she was still only nineteen.
He had not heard her when she pushed open the door. Now she tiptoed forward and laid her hand lightly upon his bended shoulders.
If she had expected to startle him, she certainly succeeded; but only in turn to be startled herself.
With a tiger spring he turned on her, and his right hand was feeling for her throat. At the same instant with the other hand he crumpled up the paper that lay before him.
For an instant he stood glaring. Then astonishment and joy took the place of the ferocity which had convulsed his features-a ferocity which had sent her shrinking back in horror as from something which had never before intruded into her gentle life.
"It's you!" said he, mopping his brow. "And to think that you should come to me, heart of my heart, and I should find nothing better to do than to want to strangle you!
But she had not recovered from that sudden glimpse of guilty fear which she had read in the man's face.
All her woman's instinct told her that it was not the mere fright of a man who is startled. Guilt-that was it-guilt and fear!
"What's come over you, Jack?" she cried. "Why were you so scared of me? Oh, Jack, if your conscience was at ease, you would not have looked at me like that!"
Sure, I was thinking of other things, and when you came tripping so lightly on those fairy feet of yours-
"No, no, it was more than that, Jack." Then a sudden suspicion seized her. "Let me see that letter you were writing."
Her suspicions became certainties. "It's to another woman," she cried. "I know it! Why else should you hold it from me?
Was it to your wife that you were writing? How am I to know that you are not a married man-you, a stranger, that nobody knows?
I am not married, Ettie. See now, I swear it! You're the only one woman on earth to me. By the cross of Christ I swear it!
"I'll tell you, acushla," said he. "I'm under oath not to show it, and just as I wouldn't break my word to you so I would keep it to those who hold my promise.
It's the business of the lodge, and even to you it's secret. And if I was scared when a hand fell on me, can't you understand it when it might have been the hand of a detective?
She felt that he was telling the truth. He gathered her into his arms and kissed away her fears and doubts.
Sit here by me, then. It's a queer throne for such a queen; but it's the best your poor lover can find.
He'll do better for you some of these days, I'm thinking. Now your mind is easy once again, is it not?
How can it ever be at ease, Jack, when I know that you are a criminal among criminals, when I never know the day that I may hear you are in court for murder?
'McMurdo the Scowrer,' that's what one of our boarders called you yesterday. It went through my heart like a knife.
Well, dear, it's not so bad as you think. We are but poor men that are trying in our own way to get our rights.
Ettie threw her arms round her lover's neck. "Give it up, Jack! For my sake, for God's sake, give it up!
It was to ask you that I came here to-day. Oh, Jack, see-I beg it of you on my bended knees! Kneeling here before you I implore you to give it up!
Sure, my darlin', you don't know what it is you are asking. How could I give it up when it would be to break my oath and to desert my comrades?
If you could see how things stand with me you could never ask it of me. Besides, if I wanted to, how could I do it?
I've thought of that, Jack. I've planned it all. Father has saved some money. He is weary of this place where the fear of these people darkens our lives.
He is ready to go. We would fly together to Philadelphia or New York, where we would be safe from them.
McMurdo laughed. "The lodge has a long arm. Do you think it could not stretch from here to Philadelphia or New York?"
Well, then, to the West, or to England, or to Germany, where father came from-anywhere to get away from this Valley of Fear!
McMurdo thought of old Brother Morris. "Sure, it is the second time I have heard the valley so named," said he.
It darkens every moment of our lives. Do you suppose that Ted Baldwin has ever forgiven us? If it were not that he fears you, what do you suppose our chances would be?
By Gar! I'd teach him better manners if I caught him at it! But see here, little girl. I can't leave here.
I can't-take that from me once and for all. But if you will leave me to find my own way, I will try to prepare a way of getting honourably out of it.
Well, well, it's just how you look at it. But if you'll give me six months, I'll work it so that I can leave without being ashamed to look others in the face.
Well, it may be seven or eight. But within a year at the furthest we will leave the valley behind us.
It was the most that Ettie could obtain, and yet it was something. There was this distant light to illuminate the gloom of the immediate future.
She returned to her father's house more light-hearted than she had ever been since Jack McMurdo had come into her life.
It might be thought that as a member, all the doings of the society would be told to him; but he was soon to discover that the organization was wider and more complex than the simple lodge.
Only once did McMurdo see him, a sly, little gray-haired rat of a man, with a slinking gait and a sidelong glance which was charged with malice.
Evans Pott was his name, and even the great Boss of Vermissa felt towards him something of the repulsion and fear which the huge Danton may have felt for the puny but dangerous Robespierre.
Would the Bodymaster see to it that suitable arrangements be made for their lodgings and comfort until the time for action should arrive?
McGinty added that it was impossible for anyone to remain secret at the Union House, and that, therefore, he would be obliged if McMurdo and Scanlan would put the strangers up for a few days in their boarding house.
His companion Andrews was little more than a boy, frank-faced and cheerful, with the breezy manner of one who is out for a holiday and means to enjoy every minute of it.
They were, as McMurdo found, quite ready to converse about their deeds in the past, which they recounted with the half-bashful pride of men who had done good and unselfish service for the community.
"They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink," Lawler explained. "They can count on us saying no more than we should.
That's true enough, and we'll talk till the cows come home of the killing of Charlie Williams or of Simon Bird, or any other job in the past.
"There are half a dozen about here that I have a word to say to," said McMurdo, with an oath. "I suppose it isn't Jack Knox of Ironhill that you are after.
In spite of the reticence of their guests, Scanlan and McMurdo were quite determined to be present at what they called "the fun."
When, therefore, at an early hour one morning McMurdo heard them creeping down the stairs he awakened Scanlan, and the two hurried on their clothes.
The boarding house was near the edge of the town, and soon they were at the crossroads which is beyond its boundary.
Here three men were waiting, with whom Lawler and Andrews held a short, eager conversation. Then they all moved on together.
It was clearly some notable job which needed numbers. At this point there are several trails which lead to various mines.
The strangers took that which led to the Crow Hill, a huge business which was in strong hands which had been able, thanks to their energetic and fearless New England manager, Josiah H. Dunn, to keep some order and discipline during the long reign of terror.
Day was breaking now, and a line of workmen were slowly making their way, singly and in groups, along the blackened path.
McMurdo and Scanlan strolled on with the others, keeping in sight of the men whom they followed. A thick mist lay over them, and from the heart of it there came the sudden scream of a steam whistle.
When they reached the open space round the mine shaft there were a hundred miners waiting, stamping their feet and blowing on their fingers; for it was bitterly cold.
The strangers stood in a little group under the shadow of the engine house. Scanlan and McMurdo climbed a heap of slag from which the whole scene lay before them.
They saw the mine engineer, a great bearded Scotchman named Menzies, come out of the engine house and blow his whistle for the cages to be lowered.
At the same instant a tall, loose-framed young man with a clean-shaved, earnest face advanced eagerly towards the pit head.
As he came forward his eyes fell upon the group, silent and motionless, under the engine house. The men had drawn down their hats and turned up their collars to screen their faces.
For a moment the presentiment of Death laid its cold hand upon the manager's heart. At the next he had shaken it off and saw only his duty towards intrusive strangers.
There was no answer; but the lad Andrews stepped forward and shot him in the stomach. The hundred waiting miners stood as motionless and helpless as if they were paralyzed.
Menzies, the Scotchman, gave a roar of rage at the sight and rushed with an iron spanner at the murderers; but was met by two balls in the face which dropped him dead at their very feet.
There was a surge forward of some of the miners, and an inarticulate cry of pity and of anger; but a couple of the strangers emptied their six-shooters over the heads of the crowd, and they broke and scattered, some of them rushing wildly back to their homes in Vermissa.
When a few of the bravest had rallied, and there was a return to the mine, the murderous gang had vanished in the mists of morning, without a single witness being able to swear to the identity of these men who in front of a hundred spectators had wrought this double crime.
Scanlan and McMurdo made their way back; Scanlan somewhat subdued, for it was the first murder job that he had seen with his own eyes, and it appeared less funny than he had been led to believe.
The horrible screams of the dead manager's wife pursued them as they hurried to the town. McMurdo was absorbed and silent; but he showed no sympathy for the weakening of his companion.
"Sure, it is like a war," he repeated. "What is it but a war between us and them, and we hit back where we best can."
There was high revel in the lodge room at the Union House that night, not only over the killing of the manager and engineer of the Crow Hill mine, which would bring this organization into line with the other blackmailed and terror-stricken companies of the district, but also over a distant triumph which had been wrought by the hands of the lodge itself.
He had insisted, however, upon efficiency in the work, and had, therefore, paid off certain drunken and idle employees who were members of the all-powerful society.
Coffin notices hung outside his door had not weakened his resolution, and so in a free, civilized country he found himself condemned to death.
The execution had now been duly carried out. Ted Baldwin, who sprawled now in the seat of honour beside the Bodymaster, had been chief of the party.
His flushed face and glazed, bloodshot eyes told of sleeplessness and drink. He and his two comrades had spent the night before among the mountains.
They were unkempt and weather-stained. But no heroes, returning from a forlorn hope, could have had a warmer welcome from their comrades.
He was so furred to keep out the cold that he could not lay his hand on his pistol. They had pulled him out and shot him again and again.
None of them knew the man; but there is eternal drama in a killing, and they had shown the Scowrers of Gilmerton that the Vermissa men were to be relied upon.
There had been one contretemps; for a man and his wife had driven up while they were still emptying their revolvers into the silent body.
Here they were, safe and sound, their work well done, and the plaudits of their companions in their ears.
That very night, as the half-drunken company broke up, he touched McMurdo on the arm and led him aside into that inner room where they had their first interview.
"See here, my lad," said he, "I've got a job that's worthy of you at last. You'll have the doing of it in your own hands."
You can take two men with you-Manders and Reilly. They have been warned for service. We'll never be right in this district until Chester Wilcox has been settled, and you'll have the thanks of every lodge in the coal fields if you can down him.
McGinty took his eternal half-chewed, half-smoked cigar from the corner of his mouth, and proceeded to draw a rough diagram on a page torn from his notebook.
He's the chief foreman of the Iron Dike Company. He's a hard citizen, an old colour sergeant of the war, all scars and grizzle.
We've had two tries at him; but had no luck, and Jim Carnaway lost his life over it. Now it's for you to take it over.
That's the house-all alone at the Iron Dike crossroad, same as you see here on the map-without another within earshot.
It's no good by day. He's armed and shoots quick and straight, with no questions asked. But at night-well, there he is with his wife, three children, and a hired help.
You can't pick or choose. It's all or none. If you could get a bag of blasting powder at the front door with a slow match to it-
What in thunder has that to do with you? Carnaway was about his house at night, and he shot him. That's enough for me and you.
Easy, Councillor, easy! What have I ever said or done that you should think I would be after standing back from an order of the Bodymaster of my own lodge?
"Very good," said McGinty, shaking him by the hand. "I leave it with you. It will be a great day when you bring us the news.
McMurdo thought long and deeply over the commission which had been so suddenly placed in his hands. The isolated house in which Chester Wilcox lived was about five miles off in an adjacent valley.
That very night he started off all alone to prepare for the attempt. It was daylight before he returned from his reconnaissance.
Next day he interviewed his two subordinates, Manders and Reilly, reckless youngsters who were as elated as if it were a deer-hunt.
Two nights later they met outside the town, all three armed, and one of them carrying a sack stuffed with the powder which was used in the quarries.
It was two in the morning before they came to the lonely house. The night was a windy one, with broken clouds drifting swiftly across the face of a three-quarter moon.
They had been warned to be on their guard against bloodhounds; so they moved forward cautiously, with their pistols cocked in their hands.
But there was no sound save the howling of the wind, and no movement but the swaying branches above them.
McMurdo listened at the door of the lonely house; but all was still within. Then he leaned the powder bag against it, ripped a hole in it with his knife, and attached the fuse.
It was an empty house which had been torn down by the gunpowder, and the grim old colour sergeant of the war was still teaching discipline to the miners of Iron Dike.
"Leave him to me," said McMurdo. "He's my man, and I'll get him sure if I have to wait a year for him."
A vote of thanks and confidence was passed in full lodge, and so for the time the matter ended. When a few weeks later it was reported in the papers that Wilcox had been shot at from an ambuscade, it was an open secret that McMurdo was still at work upon his unfinished job.
Why should these pages be stained by further crimes? Have I not said enough to show the men and their methods?
There also one may read of the shooting of Mrs. Larbey when she was nursing her husband, who had been beaten almost to death by orders of Boss McGinty.
The killing of the elder Jenkins, shortly followed by that of his brother, the mutilation of James Murdoch, the blowing up of the Staphouse family, and the murder of the Stendals all followed hard upon one another in the same terrible winter.
Darkly the shadow lay upon the Valley of Fear. The spring had come with running brooks and blossoming trees.
There was hope for all Nature bound so long in an iron grip; but nowhere was there any hope for the men and women who lived under the yoke of the terror.
The more popular he became, however, with the Freemen, the blacker were the scowls which greeted him as he passed along the streets of Vermissa.
In spite of their terror the citizens were taking heart to band themselves together against their oppressors.
Rumours had reached the lodge of secret gatherings in the Herald office and of distribution of firearms among the law-abiding people.
But McGinty and his men were undisturbed by such reports. They were numerous, resolute, and well armed.
Their opponents were scattered and powerless. It would all end, as it had done in the past, in aimless talk and possibly in impotent arrests.
It was a Saturday evening in May. Saturday was always the lodge night, and McMurdo was leaving his house to attend it when Morris, the weaker brother of the order, came to see him.
I can't forget that I spoke my heart to you once, and that you kept it to yourself, even though the Boss himself came to ask you about it.
"I know that well. But you are the one that I can speak to and be safe. I've a secret here," he put his hand to his breast, "and it is just burning the life out of me.
I wish it had come to any one of you but me. If I tell it, it will mean murder, for sure. If I don't, it may bring the end of us all.
McMurdo looked at the man earnestly. He was trembling in every limb. He poured some whisky into a glass and handed it to him.
Morris drank, and his white face took a tinge of colour. "I can tell it to you all in one sentence," said he.
McMurdo stared at him in astonishment. "Why, man, you're crazy," he said. "Isn't the place full of police and detectives and what harm did they ever do us?"
No, no, it's no man of the district. As you say, we know them, and it is little that they can do. But you've heard of Pinkerton's?
Well, you can take it from me you've no show when they are on your trail. It's not a take-it-or-miss-it government concern.
It's a dead earnest business proposition that's out for results and keeps out till by hook or crook it gets them.
Ah, it's the first thought that came to you! So it will be up at the lodge. Didn't I say to you that it would end in murder?
It is, indeed; but it's not for me to point out the man that is to be murdered. I'd never rest easy again.
And yet it's our own necks that may be at stake. In God's name what shall I do?" He rocked to and fro in his agony of indecision.
But his words had moved McMurdo deeply. It was easy to see that he shared the other's opinion as to the danger, and the need for meeting it.
"See here, man," he cried, and he almost screeched the words in his excitement, "you won't gain anything by sitting keening like an old wife at a wake.
Let's have the facts. Who is the fellow? Where is he? How did you hear of him? Why did you come to me?
I came to you; for you are the one man that would advise me. I told you that I had a store in the East before I came here.
I left good friends behind me, and one of them is in the telegraph service. Here's a letter that I had from him yesterday.
How are the Scowrers getting on in your parts? We read plenty of them in the papers. Between you and me I expect to hear news from you before long.
Five big corporations and the two railroads have taken the thing up in dead earnest. They mean it, and you can bet they'll get there!
They are right deep down into it. Pinkerton has taken hold under their orders, and his best man, Birdy Edwards, is operating.
Of course, what I give you is what I learned in business; so it goes no further. It's a queer cipher that you handle by the yard every day and can get no meaning from.
McMurdo sat in silence for some time, with the letter in his listless hands. The mist had lifted for a moment, and there was the abyss before him.
I was asking because it is likely that he may have given some description of this fellow Birdy Edwards-then we could get on his trail.
Well, it's possible. But I should not think he knew him. He is just telling me the news that came to him by way of business.
"By Gar!" he cried, "I've got him. What a fool I was not to know it. Lord! but we're in luck! We will fix him before he can do any harm.
I'll do that. You can stand right back and let me run it. Even your name need not be mentioned. I'll take it all on myself, as if it were to me that this letter has come.
Then leave it at that and keep your head shut. Now I'll get down to the lodge, and we'll soon make old man Pinkerton sorry for himself.
The less you know, Friend Morris, the easier your conscience will be, and the better you will sleep. Ask no questions, and let these things settle themselves.
"Self-protection is no murder, anyhow," said McMurdo, smiling grimly. "It's him or us. I guess this man would destroy us all if we left him long in the valley.
And yet it was clear from his actions that he thought more seriously of this new intrusion than his words would show.
Every paper which would incriminate him was destroyed before he left the house. After that he gave a long sigh of satisfaction; for it seemed to him that he was safe.
And yet the danger must still have pressed somewhat upon him; for on his way to the lodge he stopped at old man Shafter's.
The house was forbidden him; but when he tapped at the window Ettie came out to him. The dancing Irish deviltry had gone from her lover's eyes.
Sure, it is not very bad, my sweetheart. And yet it may be wise that we make a move before it is worse.
I promised you once that I would go some day. I think the time is coming. I had news to-night, bad news, and I see trouble coming.
Well, a Pinkerton. But, sure, you wouldn't know what that is, acushla, nor what it may mean to the likes of me.
I'm too deep in this thing, and I may have to get out of it quick. You said you would come with me if I went.
She put her hand in his without a word. "Well, then, listen to what I say, and do as I order you, for indeed it's the only way for us.
Things are going to happen in this valley. I feel it in my bones. There may be many of us that will have to look out for ourselves.
No, no, you shall come with me. If this valley is closed to me and I can never come back, how can I leave you behind, and me perhaps in hiding from the police with never a chance of a message?
It's with me you must come. I know a good woman in the place I come from, and it's there I'd leave you till we can get married.
God bless you for your trust in me! It's a fiend out of hell that I should be if I abused it. Now, mark you, Ettie, it will be just a word to you, and when it reaches you, you will drop everything and come right down to the waiting room at the depot and stay there till I come for you.
Somewhat eased in mind, now that his own preparations for escape had been begun, McMurdo went on to the lodge.
It had already assembled, and only by complicated signs and countersigns could he pass through the outer guard and inner guard who close-tiled it.
"Indeed, it's glad we are to see you, Brother!" cried the chairman. "There's business here that wants a Solomon in judgment to set it right."
"It's Lander and Egan," explained his neighbour as he took his seat. "They both claim the head money given by the lodge for the shooting of old man Crabbe over at Stylestown, and who's to say which fired the bullet?"
McMurdo rose in his place and raised his hand. The expression of his face froze the attention of the audience.
"Brother McMurdo claims urgency," said McGinty. "It's a claim that by the rules of this lodge takes precedence.
"Let me say, Mr. Chairman," said one of the older brethren, "that I have heard of Birdy Edwards, and that he has the name of being the best man in the Pinkerton service."
"I believe we hold him in the hollow of our hands," he continued with an exulting smile upon his face.
If we act quickly and wisely, we can cut this thing short. If I have your confidence and your help, it is little that we have to fear.
You might say so if all were as stanch as you, Councillor. But this man has all the millions of the capitalists at his back.
Do you think there is no weaker brother among all our lodges that could not be bought? He will get at our secrets-maybe has got them already.
McMurdo nodded. "Good for you, Brother Baldwin," he said. "You and I have had our differences, but you have said the true word to-night."
"Eminent Bodymaster," said McMurdo, earnestly, "I would put it to you that this is too vital a thing for us to discuss in open lodge.
God forbid that I should throw a doubt on anyone here; but if so much as a word of gossip got to the ears of this man, there would be an end of any chance of our getting him.
I would ask the lodge to choose a trusty committee, Mr. Chairman-yourself, if I might suggest it, and Brother Baldwin here, and five more.
The proposition was at once adopted, and the committee chosen. Besides the chairman and Baldwin there were the vulture-faced secretary, Harraway, Tiger Cormac, the brutal young assassin, Carter, the treasurer, and the brothers Willaby, fearless and desperate men who would stick at nothing.
"I said just now that I knew Birdy Edwards," McMurdo explained. "I need not tell you that he is not here under that name.
He's a brave man, but not a crazy one. He passes under the name of Steve Wilson, and he is lodging at Hobson's Patch.
Because I fell into talk with him. I thought little of it at the time, nor would have given it a second thought but for this letter; but now I'm sure it's the man.
I met him on the cars when I went down the line on Wednesday-a hard case if ever there was one. He said he was a reporter.
I believed it for the moment. Wanted to know all he could about the Scowrers and what he called 'the outrages' for a New York paper.
Asked me every kind of question so as to get something. You bet I was giving nothing away. 'I'd pay for it and pay well,' said he, 'if I could get some stuff that would suit my editor.'
I said what I thought would please him best, and he handed me a twenty-dollar bill for my information.
'See here,' said the operator after he'd gone out, 'I guess we should charge double rates for this. '-'I guess you should,' said I.
He had filled the form with stuff that might have been Chinese, for all we could make of it. 'He fires a sheet of this off every day,' said the clerk.
'Yes,' said I; 'it's special news for his paper, and he's scared that the others should tap it.' That was what the operator thought and what I thought at the time; but I think differently now.
"I'd start this next minute if I knew where we could find him," said McMurdo. "He's in Hobson's Patch; but I don't know the house.
I'll go to the Patch to-morrow morning. I'll find him through the operator. He can locate him, I guess.
Well, then I'll tell him that I'm a Freeman myself. I'll offer him all the secrets of the lodge for a price.
You bet he'll tumble to it. I'll tell him the papers are at my house, and that it's as much as my life would be worth to let him come while folk were about.
He'll see that that's horse sense. Let him come at ten o'clock at night, and he shall see everything.
You can plan the rest for yourselves. Widow MacNamara's is a lonely house. She's as true as steel and as deaf as a post.
There's only Scanlan and me in the house. If I get his promise-and I'll let you know if I do-I'd have the whole seven of you come to me by nine o'clock.
We'll get him in. If ever he gets out alive-well, he can talk of Birdy Edwards's luck for the rest of his days!
There's going to be a vacancy at Pinkerton's or I'm mistaken. Leave it at that, McMurdo. At nine to-morrow we'll be with you.
As McMurdo had said, the house in which he lived was a lonely one and very well suited for such a crime as they had planned.
It was on the extreme fringe of the town and stood well back from the road. In any other case the conspirators would have simply called out their man, as they had many a time before, and emptied their pistols into his body; but in this instance it was very necessary to find out how much he knew, how he knew it, and what had been passed on to his employers.
It was possible that they were already too late and that the work had been done. If that was indeed so, they could at least have their revenge upon the man who had done it.
However, all this they would learn from his own lips. Once in their power, they would find a way to make him speak.
McMurdo turned away and refused to speak with him. He was back from his mission in the afternoon, and saw McGinty at the Union House.
"Good!" said McGinty. The giant was in his shirt sleeves, with chains and seals gleaming athwart his ample waistcoat and a diamond twinkling through the fringe of his bristling beard.
Drink and politics had made the Boss a very rich as well as powerful man. The more terrible, therefore, seemed that glimpse of the prison or the gallows which had risen before him the night before.
McMurdo shook his head gloomily. "He's been here some time-six weeks at the least. I guess he didn't come into these parts to look at the prospect.
If he has been working among us all that time with the railroad money at his back, I should expect that he has got results, and that he has passed them on.
"There's not a weak man in the lodge," cried McGinty. "True as steel, every man of them. And yet, by the Lord!
"Well, there would be no harm in that," McMurdo answered. "I won't deny that I have a liking for Morris and would be sorry to see him come to harm.
He has spoken to me once or twice over lodge matters, and though he may not see them the same as you or I, he never seemed the sort that squeals.
"Well, you know best about that," McMurdo answered. "But whatever you do must be to-morrow; for we must lie low until the Pinkerton affair is settled up.
"True for you," said McGinty. "And we'll learn from Birdy Edwards himself where he got his news if we have to cut his heart out first.
McMurdo laughed. "I guess I took him on his weak point," he said. "If he could get on a good trail of the Scowrers, he's ready to follow it into hell.
I took his money," McMurdo grinned as he produced a wad of dollar notes, "and as much more when he has seen all my papers."
Well, there are no papers. But I filled him up about constitutions and books of rules and forms of membership.
"Faith, he's right there," said McGinty grimly. "Didn't he ask you why you didn't bring him the papers?"
As if I would carry such things, and me a suspected man, and Captain Marvin after speaking to me this very day at the depot!
"Ay, I heard of that," said McGinty. "I guess the heavy end of this business is coming on to you. We could put him down an old shaft when we've done with him; but however we work it we can't get past the man living at Hobson's Patch and you being there to-day."
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "If we handle it right, they can never prove the killing," said he. "No one can see him come to the house after dark, and I'll lay to it that no one will see him go.
Now see here, Councillor, I'll show you my plan and I'll ask you to fit the others into it. You will all come in good time.
Very well. He comes at ten. He is to tap three times, and me to open the door for him. Then I'll get behind him and shut it.
Yes; but the next step wants considering. He's a hard proposition. He's heavily armed. I've fooled him proper, and yet he is likely to be on his guard.
Suppose I show him right into a room with seven men in it where he expected to find me alone. There is going to be shooting, and somebody is going to be hurt.
This is how I should work it. You will all be in the big room-same as you saw when you had a chat with me.
I'll open the door for him, show him into the parlour beside the door, and leave him there while I get the papers.
That will give me the chance of telling you how things are shaping. Then I will go back to him with some faked papers.
As he is reading them I will jump for him and get my grip on his pistol arm. You'll hear me call and in you will rush.
The quicker the better; for he is as strong a man as I, and I may have more than I can manage. But I allow that I can hold him till you come.
"It's a good plan," said McGinty. "The lodge will owe you a debt for this. I guess when I move out of the chair I can put a name to the man that's coming after me."
"Sure, Councillor, I am little more than a recruit," said McMurdo; but his face showed what he thought of the great man's compliment.
Then he surveyed the room in which the detective was to be trapped. It was a large apartment, with a long deal table in the centre, and the big stove at one side.
At each of the other sides were windows. There were no shutters on these: only light curtains which drew across.
McMurdo examined these attentively. No doubt it must have struck him that the apartment was very exposed for so secret a meeting.
Yet its distance from the road made it of less consequence. Finally he discussed the matter with his fellow lodger.
And if I were you, Mike Scanlan, I would take a night off and keep clear of it. There will be bloody work here before morning.
"Well, indeed then, Mac," Scanlan answered. "It's not the will but the nerve that is wanting in me. When I saw Manager Dunn go down at the colliery yonder it was just more than I could stand.
I'm not made for it, same as you or McGinty. If the lodge will think none the worse of me, I'll just do as you advise and leave you to yourselves for the evening.
There was not a man in the room whose hands had not been reddened a dozen times before. They were as hardened to human murder as a butcher to sheep.
The treasurer, Carter, was a middle-aged man, with an impassive, rather sulky expression, and a yellow parchment skin.
He was a capable organizer, and the actual details of nearly every outrage had sprung from his plotting brain.
These were the men who assembled that night under the roof of McMurdo for the killing of the Pinkerton detective.
Their host had placed whisky upon the table, and they had hastened to prime themselves for the work before them.
Baldwin and Cormac were already half-drunk, and the liquor had brought out all their ferocity. Cormac placed his hands on the stove for an instant-it had been lighted, for the nights were still cold.
"Ay," said Baldwin, catching his meaning. "If he is strapped to that, we will have the truth out of him."
"We'll have the truth out of him, never fear," said McMurdo. He had nerves of steel, this man; for though the whole weight of the affair was on him his manner was as cool and unconcerned as ever.
"You are the one to handle him," said the Boss approvingly. "Not a warning will he get till your hand is on his throat.
McMurdo went from one to the other and drew the curtains tighter. "Sure no one can spy upon us now. It's close upon the hour."
"He'll come, never fear," McMurdo answered. "He is as eager to come as you can be to see him. Hark to that!"
They all sat like wax figures, some with their glasses arrested halfway to their lips. Three loud knocks had sounded at the door.
"Hush!" McMurdo raised his hand in caution. An exulting glance went round the circle, and hands were laid upon their weapons.
"Not a sound, for your lives!" McMurdo whispered, as he went from the room, closing the door carefully behind him.
With strained ears the murderers waited. They counted the steps of their comrade down the passage. Then they heard him open the outer door.
There were a few words as of greeting. Then they were aware of a strange step inside and of an unfamiliar voice.
An instant later came the slam of the door and the turning of the key in the lock. Their prey was safe within the trap.
There was a mutter of conversation from the next room. It seemed interminable. Then the door opened, and McMurdo appeared, his finger upon his lip.
He came to the end of the table and looked round at them. A subtle change had come over him. His manner was as of one who has great work to do.
His face had set into granite firmness. His eyes shone with a fierce excitement behind his spectacles.
He had become a visible leader of men. They stared at him with eager interest; but he said nothing. Still with the same singular gaze he looked from man to man.
There were ten seconds after that brief speech during which the room might have been empty, so profound was the silence.
The hissing of a kettle upon the stove rose sharp and strident to the ear. Seven white faces, all turned upward to this man who dominated them, were set motionless with utter terror.
Then, with a sudden shivering of glass, a bristle of glistening rifle barrels broke through each window, while the curtains were torn from their hangings.
"You're safer there, Councillor," said the man whom they had known as McMurdo. "And you, Baldwin, if you don't take your hand off your pistol, you'll cheat the hangman yet.
Pull it out, or by the Lord that made me-There, that will do. There are forty armed men round this house, and you can figure it out for yourself what chance you have.
There was no possible resistance under the menace of those rifles. The men were disarmed. Sulky, sheepish, and amazed, they still sat round the table.
"I'd like to say a word to you before we separate," said the man who had trapped them. "I guess we may not meet again until you see me on the stand in the courthouse.
I'll give you something to think over between now and then. You know me now for what I am. At last I can put my cards on the table.
I am Birdy Edwards of Pinkerton's. I was chosen to break up your gang. I had a hard and dangerous game to play.
Not a soul, not one soul, not my nearest and dearest, knew that I was playing it. Only Captain Marvin here and my employers knew that.
The seven pale, rigid faces looked up at him. There was unappeasable hatred in their eyes. He read the relentless threat.
So I joined your infernal lodge, and I took my share in your councils. Maybe they will say that I was as bad as you.
They can say what they like, so long as I get you. But what is the truth? The night I joined you beat up old man Stanger.
I could not warn him, for there was no time; but I held your hand, Baldwin, when you would have killed him.
If ever I have suggested things, so as to keep my place among you, they were things which I knew I could prevent.
I could not save Dunn and Menzies, for I did not know enough; but I will see that their murderers are hanged.
I gave Chester Wilcox warning, so that when I blew his house in he and his folk were in hiding. There was many a crime that I could not stop; but if you look back and think how often your man came home the other road, or was down in town when you went for him, or stayed indoors when you thought he would come out, you'll see my work.
I've nothing more to say to you, except that when my time comes I'll die the easier when I think of the work I have done in this valley.
There is little more to tell. Scanlan had been given a sealed note to be left at the address of Miss Ettie Shafter, a mission which he had accepted with a wink and a knowing smile.
It was the last time that ever either Ettie or her lover set foot in the Valley of Fear. Ten days later they were married in Chicago, with old Jacob Shafter as witness of the wedding.
The trial of the Scowrers was held far from the place where their adherents might have terrified the guardians of the law.
In vain they struggled. In vain the money of the lodge-money squeezed by blackmail out of the whole countryside-was spent like water in the attempt to save them.
That cold, clear, unimpassioned statement from one who knew every detail of their lives, their organization, and their crimes was unshaken by all the wiles of their defenders.
At last after so many years they were broken and scattered. The cloud was lifted forever from the valley.
McGinty met his fate upon the scaffold, cringing and whining when the last hour came. Eight of his chief followers shared his fate.
And yet, as he had guessed, the game was not over yet. There was another hand to be played, and yet another and another.
Ted Baldwin, for one, had escaped the scaffold; so had the Willabys; so had several others of the fiercest spirits of the gang.
For ten years they were out of the world, and then came a day when they were free once more-a day which Edwards, who knew his men, was very sure would be an end of his life of peace.
They had sworn an oath on all that they thought holy to have his blood as a vengeance for their comrades.
From Chicago he was chased, after two attempts so near success that it was sure that the third would get him.
From Chicago he went under a changed name to California, and it was there that the light went for a time out of his life when Ettie Edwards died.
Once again he was nearly killed, and once again under the name of Douglas he worked in a lonely canyon, where with an English partner named Barker he amassed a fortune.
At last there came a warning to him that the bloodhounds were on his track once more, and he cleared-only just in time-for England.
And thence came the John Douglas who for a second time married a worthy mate, and lived for five years as a Sussex county gentleman, a life which ended with the strange happenings of which we have heard.
The police trial had passed, in which the case of John Douglas was referred to a higher court. So had the Quarter Sessions, at which he was acquitted as having acted in self-defense.
"Get him out of England at any cost," wrote Holmes to the wife. "There are forces here which may be more dangerous than those he has escaped.
Two months had gone by, and the case had to some extent passed from our minds. Then one morning there came an enigmatic note slipped into our letter box.
"Dear me, Mr. Holmes. Dear me!" said this singular epistle. There was neither superscription nor signature.
Late last night Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, brought up a message that a gentleman wished to see Mr. Holmes, and that the matter was of the utmost importance.
Close at the heels of his messenger came Cecil Barker, our friend of the moated Manor House. His face was drawn and haggard.
It's poor Douglas. They tell me his name is Edwards; but he will always be Jack Douglas of Benito Canyon to me.
"Ha! It came like that, did it?" said Holmes thoughtfully. "Well, I've no doubt it was well stage-managed."
"No, no, my good sir," said Holmes. "There is a master hand here. It is no case of sawed-off shotguns and clumsy six-shooters.
You can tell an old master by the sweep of his brush. I can tell a Moriarty when I see one. This crime is from London, not from America.
Because it is done by a man who cannot afford to fail, one whose whole unique position depends upon the fact that all he does must succeed.
A great brain and a huge organization have been turned to the extinction of one man. It is crushing the nut with the triphammer-an absurd extravagance of energy-but the nut is very effectually crushed all the same.
I can only say that the first word that ever came to us of the business was from one of his lieutenants.
These Americans were well advised. Having an English job to do, they took into partnership, as any foreign criminal could do, this great consultant in crime.
From that moment their man was doomed. At first he would content himself by using his machinery in order to find their victim.
Then he would indicate how the matter might be treated. Finally, when he read in the reports of the failure of this agent, he would step in himself with a master touch.
You heard me warn this man at Birlstone Manor House that the coming danger was greater than the past.
Barker beat his head with his clenched fist in his impotent anger. "Do not tell me that we have to sit down under this?
"No, I don't say that," said Holmes, and his eyes seemed to be looking far into the future. "I don't say that he can't be beat.
I The Adventure of the Illustrious Client V The Adventure of the Sussex Vampire X The Adventure of the Veiled Lodger
"It can't hurt now," was Mr. Sherlock Holmes's comment when, for the tenth time in as many years, I asked his leave to reveal the following narrative.
So it was that at last I obtained permission to put on record what was, in some ways, the supreme moment of my friend's career.
Both Holmes and I had a weakness for the Turkish Bath. It was over a smoke in the pleasant lassitude of the drying-room that I have found him less reticent and more human than anywhere else.
I had asked him whether anything was stirring, and for answer he had shot his long, thin, nervous arm out of the sheets which enveloped him and had drawn an envelope from the inside pocket of the coat which hung beside him.
"It may be some fussy, self-important fool, it may be a matter of life or death," said he, as he handed me the note.
Sir James Damery presents his compliments to Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and will call upon him at 4.30 to-morrow.
Sir James begs to say that the matter upon which he desires to consult Mr. Holmes is very delicate, and also very important.
He trusts, therefore, that Mr. Holmes will make every effort to grant this interview, and that he will confirm it over the telephone to the Carlton Club.
"I need not say that I have confirmed it, Watson," said Holmes, as I returned the paper. "Do you know anything of this man Damery?"
Well, I can tell you a little more than that. He has rather a reputation for arranging delicate matters which are to be kept out of the papers.
You may remember his negotiations with Sir George Lewis over the Hammerford Will case. He is a man of the world with a natural turn for diplomacy.
I am bound, therefore, to hope that it is not a false scent and that he has some real need for our assistance.
I was living in my own rooms in Queen Anne Street at the time, but I was round at Baker Street before the time named.
"I have had several opponents to whom that flattering term has been applied," said Holmes, with a smile.
Colonel Damery threw up his kid-gloved hands with a laugh. "There is no getting past you, Mr. Holmes!
It is my business to follow the details of Continental crime. Who could possibly have read what happened at Prague and have any doubts as to the man's guilt!
I knew, also, that he had come to England, and had a presentiment that sooner or later he would find me some work to do.
Well, what has Baron Gruner been up to? I presume it is not this old tragedy which has come up again?
Mr. Holmes, I must beg you not to press that question. It is important that I should be able to assure him that his honoured name has been in no way dragged into the matter.
His motives are, to the last degree, honourable and chivalrous, but he prefers to remain unknown. I need not say that your fees will be assured and that you will be given a perfectly free hand.
"I am sorry," said Holmes. "I am accustomed to have mystery at one end of my cases, but to have it at both ends is too confusing.
Our visitor was greatly disturbed. His large, sensitive face was darkened with emotion and disappointment.
He has a daughter, Violet de Merville, young, rich, beautiful, accomplished, a wonder-woman in every way.
It is this daughter, this lovely, innocent girl, whom we are endeavouring to save from the clutches of a fiend.
It was on a Mediterranean yachting voyage. The company, though select, paid their own passages. No doubt the promoters hardly realized the Baron's true character until it was too late.
The villain attached himself to the lady, and with such effect that he has completely and absolutely won her heart.
To say that she loves him hardly expresses it. She dotes upon him, she is obsessed by him. Outside of him there is nothing on earth.
She will not hear one word against him. Everything has been done to cure her of her madness, but in vain.
To sum up, she proposes to marry him next month. As she is of age and has a will of iron, it is hard to know how to prevent her.
The cunning devil has told her every unsavoury public scandal of his past life, but always in such a way as to make himself out to be an innocent martyr.
Dear me! But surely you have inadvertently let out the name of your client? It is no doubt General de Merville.
I could deceive you by saying so, Mr. Holmes, but it would not be true. De Merville is a broken man. The strong soldier has been utterly demoralized by this incident.
He has lost the nerve which never failed him on the battlefield and has become a weak, doddering old man, utterly incapable of contending with a brilliant, forceful rascal like this Austrian.
My client, however, is an old friend, one who has known the General intimately for many years and taken a paternal interest in this young girl since she wore short frocks.
He cannot see this tragedy consummated without some attempt to stop it. There is nothing in which Scotland Yard can act.
It was his own suggestion that you should be called in, but it was, as I have said, on the express stipulation that he should not be personally involved in the matter.
I have no doubt, Mr. Holmes, with your great powers you could easily trace my client back through me, but I must ask you, as a point of honour, to refrain from doing so, and not to break in upon his incognito.
"I think I may safely promise that," said he. "I may add that your problem interests me, and that I shall be prepared to look into it.
The Carlton Club will find me. But, in case of emergency, there is a private telephone call, 'XX.31.'
Vernon Lodge, near Kingston. It is a large house. He has been fortunate in some rather shady speculations and is a rich man, which, naturally, makes him a more dangerous antagonist.
He has expensive tastes. He is a horse fancier. For a short time he played polo at Hurlingham, but then this Prague affair got noised about and he had to leave.
He collects books and pictures. He is a man with a considerable artistic side to his nature. He is, I believe, a recognized authority upon Chinese pottery, and has written a book upon the subject.
"A complex mind," said Holmes. "All great criminals have that. My old friend Charlie Peace was a violin virtuoso.
Wainwright was no mean artist. I could quote many more. Well, Sir James, you will inform your client that I am turning my mind upon Baron Gruner.
I can say no more. I have some sources of information of my own, and dare say we may find some means of opening matter up.
When our visitor had left us, Holmes sat so long in deep thought that it seemed to me that he had forgotten my presence.
My dear Watson, if her poor old broken father cannot move her, how shall I, a stranger, prevail? And yet there is something in the suggestion if all else fails.
But I think we must begin from a different angle. I rather fancy that Shinwell Johnson might be a help.
I have not had occasion to mention Shinwell Johnson in these memoirs because I have seldom drawn my cases from the latter phases of my friend's career.
During the first years of the century he became a valuable assistant. Johnson, I grieve to say, made his name first as a very dangerous villain and served two terms at Parkhurst.
Finally, he repented and allied himself to Holmes, acting as his agent in the huge criminal underworld of London, and obtaining information which often proved to be of vital importance.
Had Johnson been a "nark" of the police he would soon have been exposed, but as he dealt with cases which never came directly into the courts, his activities were never realized by his companions.
It was not possible for me to follow the immediate steps taken by my friend, for I had some pressing professional business of my own, but I met him by appointment that evening at Simpson's, where, sitting at a small table in the front window, and looking down at the rushing stream of life in the Strand, he told me something of what had passed.
"Johnson is on the prowl," said he. "He may pick up some garbage in the darker recesses of the underworld, for it is down there, amid the black roots of crime, that we must hunt for this man's secrets."
But, if the lady will not accept what is already known, why should any fresh discovery of yours turn her from her purpose?
Who knows, Watson? Woman's heart and mind are insoluble puzzles to the male. Murder might be condoned or explained, and yet some smaller offence might rankle.
Oh, to be sure, I had not told you of my plans! Well, Watson, I love to come to close grips with my man.
I like to meet him eye to eye and read for myself the stuff that he is made of. When I had given Johnson his instructions, I took a cab out to Kingston and found the Baron in a most affable mood.
He has breed in him, a real aristocrat of crime, with a superficial suggestion of afternoon tea and all the cruelty of the grave behind it.
Mighty dangerous. I disregard the blusterer, but this is the sort of man who says rather less than he means.
Considering that he undoubtedly murdered his last wife, I should say it mattered very much. Besides, the client!
Well, well, we need not discuss that. When you have finished your coffee you had best come home with me, for the blithe Shinwell will be there with his report.
We found him sure enough, a huge, coarse, red-faced, scorbutic man, with a pair of vivid black eyes which were the only external sign of the very cunning mind within.
It seems that he had dived down into what was peculiarly his kingdom, and beside him on the settee was a brand which he had brought up in the shape of a slim, flame-like young woman with a pale, intense face, youthful, and yet so worn with sin and sorrow that one read the terrible years which had left their leprous mark upon her.
"This is Miss Kitty Winter," said Shinwell Johnson, waving his fat hand as an introduction. "What she don't know--well, there, she'll speak for herself.
"I'm easy to find," said the young woman. "Hell, London, gets me every time. Same address for Porky Shinwell.
We're old mates, Porky, you and I. But, by Gripes! there is another who ought to be down in a lower hell than we if there was any justice in the world!
"If I can help to put him where he belongs, I'm yours to the rattle," said our visitor, with fierce energy.
There was an intensity of hatred in her white, set face and her blazing eyes such as woman seldom and man never can attain.
You needn't go into my past, Mr. Holmes. That's neither here nor there. But what I am Adelbert Gruner made me.
If I could pull him down!" She clutched frantically with her hands into the air. "Oh, if I could only pull him into the pit where he has pushed so many!"
Porky Shinwell has been telling me. He's after some other poor fool and wants to marry her this time.
You want to stop it. Well, you surely know enough about this devil to prevent any decent girl in her senses wanting to be in the same parish with him.
Well, it might be worth trying. But he has told her most of his sins and had pardon from her, and I understand she will not reopen the question.
"I'll lay he didn't tell her all," said Miss Winter. "I caught a glimpse of one or two murders besides the one that made such a fuss.
He would speak of someone in his velvet way and then look at me with a steady eye and say: 'He died within a month.'
It wasn't hot air, either. But I took little notice--you see, I loved him myself at that time. Whatever he did went with me, same as with this poor fool!
There was just one thing that shook me. Yes, by Gripes! if it had not been for his poisonous, lying tongue that explains and soothes, I'd have left him that very night.
It's a book he has--a brown leather book with a lock, and his arms in gold on the outside. I think he was a bit drunk that night, or he would not have shown it to me.
I tell you, Mr. Holmes, this man collects women, and takes a pride in his collection, as some men collect moths or butterflies.
He had it all in that book. Snapshot photographs, names, details, everything about them. It was a beastly book--a book no man, even if he had come from the gutter, could have put together.
But it was Adelbert Gruner's book all the same. 'Souls I have ruined.' He could have put that on the outside if he had been so minded.
However, that's neither here nor there, for the book would not serve you, and, if it would, you can't get it.
How can I tell you where it is now? It's more than a year since I left him. I know where he kept it then.
He's a precise, tidy cat of a man in many of his ways, so maybe it is still in the pigeon-hole of the old bureau in the inner study.
Have you, though? You haven't been slow on the job if you only started this morning. Maybe dear Adelbert has met his match this time.
The outer study is the one with the Chinese crockery in it--big glass cupboard between the windows. Then behind his desk is the door that leads to the inner study--a small room where he keeps papers and things.
Adelbert is no coward. His worst enemy couldn't say that of him. He can look after himself. There's a burglar alarm at night.
"No good," said Shinwell Johnson, with the decided voice of the expert. "No fence wants stuff of that sort that you can neither melt nor sell."
I am exceedingly obliged to you for your co-operation. I need not say that my clients will consider liberally----
"None of that, Mr. Holmes," cried the young woman. "I am not out for money. Let me see this man in the mud, and I've got all I worked for--in the mud with my foot on his cursed face.
That's my price. I'm with you to-morrow or any other day so long as you are on his track. Porky here can tell you always where to find me.
I did not see Holmes again until the following evening, when we dined once more at our Strand restaurant.
He shrugged his shoulders when I asked him what luck he had had in his interview. Then he told the story, which I would repeat in this way.
With an oath Miss Winter darted forward, and if I had not caught her wrist she would have clutched this maddening woman by the hair.
I dragged her towards the door, and was lucky to get her back into the cab without a public scene, for she was beside herself with rage.
In a cold way I felt pretty furious myself, Watson, for there was something indescribably annoying in the calm aloofness and supreme self-complaisance of the woman whom we were trying to save.
So now once again you know exactly how we stand, and it is clear that I must plan some fresh opening move, for this gambit won't work.
I'll keep in touch with you, Watson, for it is more than likely that you will have your part to play, though it is just possible that the next move may lie with them rather than with us.
And it did. Their blow fell--or his blow rather, for never could I believe that the lady was privy to it.
I think I could show you the very paving-stone upon which I stood when my eyes fell upon the placard, and a pang of horror passed through my very soul.
It was between the "Grand Hotel" and Charing Cross Station, where a one-legged news-vendor displayed his evening papers.
The date was just two days after the last conversation. There, black upon yellow, was the terrible news-sheet:
We learn with regret that Mr. Sherlock Holmes, the well-known private detective, was the victim this morning of a murderous assault which has left him in a precarious position.
The attack was made by two men armed with sticks, and Mr. Holmes was beaten about the head and body, receiving injuries which the doctors describe as most serious.
He was carried to Charing Cross Hospital, and afterwards insisted upon being taken to his rooms in Baker Street.
No doubt they belonged to that criminal fraternity which has so often had occasion to bewail the activity and ingenuity of the injured man.
I need not say that my eyes had hardly glanced over the paragraph before I had sprung into a hansom and was on my way to Baker Street.
"No immediate danger," was his report. "Two lacerated scalp wounds and some considerable bruises. Several stitches have been necessary.
Morphine has been injected and quiet is essential, but an interview of a few minutes would not be absolutely forbidden.
With this permission I stole into the darkened room. The sufferer was wide awake, and I heard my name in a hoarse whisper.
The blind was three-quarters down, but one ray of sunlight slanted through and struck the bandaged head of the injured man.
"All right, Watson. Don't look so scared," he muttered in a very weak voice. "It's not as bad as it seems."
I'm a bit of a single-stick expert, as you know. I took most of them on my guard. It was the second man that was too much for me.
What can I do, Holmes? Of course, it was that damned fellow who set them on. I'll go and thrash the hide off him if you give the word.
Good old Watson! No, we can do nothing there unless the police lay their hands on the men. But their get-away had been well prepared.
We may be sure of that. Wait a little. I have my plans. The first thing is to exaggerate my injuries.
They'll come to you for news. Put it on thick, Watson. Lucky if I live the week out--concussion--delirium--what you like!
Yes. Tell Shinwell Johnson to get that girl out of the way. Those beauties will be after her now. They know, of course, that she was with me in the case.
Put my pipe on the table--and the tobacco-slipper. Right! Come in each morning and we will plan our campaign.
I arranged with Johnson that evening to take Miss Winter to a quiet suburb and see that she lay low until the danger was past.
For six days the public were under the impression that Holmes was at the door of death. The bulletins were very grave and there were sinister paragraphs in the papers.
My continual visits assured me that it was not so bad as that. His wiry constitution and his determined will were working wonders.
He was recovering fast, and I had suspicions at times that he was really finding himself faster than he pretended, even to me.
There was a curious secretive streak in the man which led to many dramatic effects, but left even his closest friend guessing as to what his exact plans might be.
He pushed to an extreme the axiom that the only safe plotter was he who plotted alone. I was nearer him than anyone else, and yet I was always conscious of the gap between.
On the seventh day the stitches were taken out, in spite of which there was a report of erysipelas in the evening papers.
Holmes listened to the news with a cold, concentrated look upon his pale face, which told me that it hit him hard.
"Friday!" he cried. "Only three clear days. I believe the rascal wants to put himself out of danger's way.
He gave no explanations and I asked for none. By long experience I had learned the wisdom of obedience.
But when I had left his room I walked down Baker Street, revolving in my head how on earth I was to carry out so strange an order.
Finally I drove to the London Library in St. James's Square, put the matter to my friend Lomax, the sub-librarian, and departed to my rooms with a goodly volume under my arm.
It is said that the barrister who crams up a case with such care that he can examine an expert witness upon the Monday has forgotten all his forced knowledge before the Saturday.
I was charged with all this information when I called upon Holmes next evening. He was out of bed now, though you would not have guessed it from the published reports, and he sat with his much-bandaged head resting upon his hand in the depth of his favourite arm-chair.
"That," said he, "is the very impression which I intended to convey. And now, Watson, have you learned your lessons?"
He opened the lid and took out a small object most carefully wrapped in some fine Eastern silk. This he unfolded, and disclosed a delicate little saucer of the most beautiful deep-blue colour.
It needs careful handling, Watson. This is the real egg-shell pottery of the Ming dynasty. No finer piece ever passed through Christie's.
A complete set of this would be worth a king's ransom--in fact, it is doubtful if there is a complete set outside the Imperial palace of Peking.
That is your name for the evening, Watson. You will call upon Baron Gruner. I know something of his habits, and at half-past eight he would probably be disengaged.
A note will tell him in advance that you are about to call, and you will say that you are bringing him a specimen of an absolutely unique set of Ming china.
You may as well be a medical man, since that is a part which you can play without duplicity. You are a collector, this set has come your way, you have heard of the Baron's interest in the subject, and you are not averse to selling at a price.
Well asked, Watson. You would certainly fall down badly if you did not know the value of your own wares.
This saucer was got for me by Sir James, and comes, I understand, from the collection of his client. You will not exaggerate if you say that it could hardly be matched in the world.
Excellent, Watson! You scintillate to-day. Suggest Christie or Sotheby. Your delicacy prevents your putting a price for yourself.
Oh, yes, he will see you. He has the collection mania in its most acute form--and especially on this subject, on which he is an acknowledged authority.
Sit down, Watson, and I will dictate the letter. No answer needed. You will merely say that you are coming, and why.
It was an admirable document, short, courteous, and stimulating to the curiosity of the connoisseur. A district messenger was duly dispatched with it.
On the same evening, with the precious saucer in my hand and the card of Dr. Hill Barton in my pocket, I set off on my own adventure.
The beautiful house and grounds indicated that Baron Gruner was, as Sir James had said, a man of considerable wealth.
A long winding drive, with banks of rare shrubs on either side, opened out into a great gravelled square adorned with statues.
A butler who would have adorned a bench of bishops showed me in, and handed me over to a plush-clad footman, who ushered me into the Baron's presence.
He was standing at the open front of a great case which stood between the windows, and which contained part of his Chinese collection.
"Pray sit down, doctor," said he. "I was looking over my own treasures and wondering whether I could really afford to add to them.
This little Tang specimen, which dates from the seventh century, would probably interest you. I am sure you never saw finer workmanship or a richer glaze.
I carefully unpacked it and handed it to him. He seated himself at his desk, pulled over the lamp, for it was growing dark, and set himself to examine it.
He was certainly a remarkably handsome man. His European reputation for beauty was fully deserved. In figure he was not more than of middle size, but was built upon graceful and active lines.
His face was swarthy, almost Oriental, with large, dark, languorous eyes which might easily hold an irresistible fascination for women.
His hair and moustache were raven black, the latter short, pointed, and carefully waxed. His features were regular and pleasing, save only his straight, thin-lipped mouth.
If ever I saw a murderer's mouth it was there--a cruel, hard gash in the face, compressed, inexorable, and terrible.
He was ill-advised to train his moustache away from it, for it was Nature's danger-signal, set as a warning to his victims.
His voice was engaging and his manners perfect. In age I should have put him at little over thirty, though his record afterwards showed that he was forty-two.
"Very fine--very fine indeed!" he said at last. "And you say you have a set of six to correspond. What puzzles me is that I should not have heard of such magnificent specimens.
I only know of one in England to match this, and it is certainly not likely to be in the market. Would it be indiscreet if I were to ask you, Dr. Hill Barton, how you obtained this?
"Does it really matter?" I asked, with as careless an air as I could muster. "You can see that the piece is genuine, and, as to the value, I am content to take an expert's valuation."
"Very mysterious," said he, with a quick, suspicious flash of his dark eyes. "In dealing with objects of such value, one naturally wishes to know all about the transaction.
That the piece is genuine is certain. I have no doubts at all about that. But suppose--I am bound to take every possibility into account--that it should prove afterwards that you had no right to sell?
"You can do business or not," said I, with indifference. "I have given you the first offer as I understood that you were a connoisseur, but I shall have no difficulty in other quarters."
That is no answer. If a man has a hobby he follows it up, whatever his other pursuits may be. You said in your note that you were a connoisseur.
Might I ask you a few questions to test you? I am obliged to tell you, doctor--if you are indeed a doctor--that the incident becomes more and more suspicious.
I would ask you what do you know of the Emperor Shomu and how do you associate him with the Shoso-in near Nara?
Dear me, does that puzzle you? Tell me a little about the Northern Wei dynasty and its place in the history of ceramics.
"This is intolerable, sir," said I. "I came here to do you a favour, and not to be examined as if I were a schoolboy.
My knowledge on these subjects may be second only to your own, but I certainly shall not answer questions which have been put in so offensive a way.
He looked at me steadily. The languor had gone from his eyes. They suddenly glared. There was a gleam of teeth from between those cruel lips.
What is the game? You are here as a spy. You are an emissary of Holmes. This is a trick that you are playing upon me.
The fellow is dying, I hear, so he sends his tools to keep watch upon me. You've made your way in here without leave, and, by God!
He had sprung to his feet, and I stepped back, bracing myself for an attack, for the man was beside himself with rage.
He may have suspected me from the first; certainly this cross-examination had shown him the truth; but it was clear that I could not hope to deceive him.
He dived his hand into a side-drawer and rummaged furiously. Then something struck upon his ear, for he stood listening intently.
Two steps took me to the open door, and my mind will ever carry a clear picture of the scene within. The window leading out to the garden was wide open.
Beside it, looking like some terrible ghost, his head girt with bloody bandages, his face drawn and white, stood Sherlock Holmes.
The next instant he was through the gap, and I heard the crash of his body among the laurel bushes outside.
And then! It was done in an instant, and yet I clearly saw it. An arm--a woman's arm--shot out from among the leaves.
Then he fell upon the carpet, rolling and writhing, while scream after scream resounded through the house.
I seized a carafe from a side-table and rushed to his aid. At the same moment the butler and several footmen ran in from the hall.
I remember that one of them fainted as I knelt by the injured man and turned that awful face to the light of the lamp.
The vitriol was eating into it everywhere and dripping from the ears and the chin. One eye was already white and glazed.
The other was red and inflamed. The features which I had admired a few minutes before were now like some beautiful painting over which the artist has passed a wet and foul sponge.
Between his screams the victim raged and raved against the avenger. "It was that hell-cat, Kitty Winter!"
I bathed his face in oil, put cotton wadding on the raw surfaces, and administered a hypodermic of morphia.
All suspicion of me had passed from his mind in the presence of this shock, and he clung to my hands as if I might have the power even yet to clear those dead-fish eyes which gazed up at me.
I could have wept over the ruin had I not remembered very clearly the vile life which had led up to so hideous a change.
It was loathsome to feel the pawing of his burning hands, and I was relieved when his family surgeon, closely followed by a specialist, came to relieve me of my charge.
Holmes was seated in his familiar chair, looking very pale and exhausted. Apart from his injuries, even his iron nerves had been shocked by the events of the evening, and he listened with horror to my account of the Baron's transformation.
"The wages of sin, Watson--the wages of sin!" said he. "Sooner or later it will always come. God knows, there was sin enough," he added, taking up a brown volume from the table.
Here is the book the woman talked of. If this will not break off the marriage, nothing ever could. But it will, Watson.
Or his lust diary. Call it what you will. The moment the woman told us of it I realized what a tremendous weapon was there, if we could but lay our hands on it.
I said nothing at the time to indicate my thoughts, for this woman might have given it away. But I brooded over it.
Then this assault upon me gave me the chance of letting the Baron think that no precautions need be taken against me.
That was all to the good. I would have waited a little longer, but his visit to America forced my hand.
He would never have left so compromising a document behind him. Therefore we had to act at once. Burglary at night is impossible.
He takes precautions. But there was a chance in the evening if I could only be sure that his attention was engaged.
Therefore I gathered the girl up at the last moment. How could I guess what the little packet was that she carried so carefully under her cloak?
I feared he would. But you held him in play just long enough for me to get the book, though not long enough for an unobserved escape.
Our courtly friend had appeared in answer to a previous summons. He listened with the deepest attention to Holmes's account of what had occurred.
"You have done wonders--wonders!" he cried, when he had heard the narrative. "But if these injuries are as terrible as Dr. Watson describes, then surely our purpose of thwarting the marriage is sufficiently gained without the use of this horrible book."
Women of the de Merville type do not act like that. She would love him the more as a disfigured martyr.
No, no. It is his moral side, not his physical, which we have to destroy. That book will bring her back to earth--and I know nothing else that could.
Sir James carried away both it and the precious saucer. As I was myself overdue, I went down with him into the street.
A brougham was waiting for him. He sprang in, gave a hurried order to the cockaded coachman, and drove swiftly away.
He flung his overcoat half out of the window to cover the armorial bearings upon the panel, but I had seen them in the glare of our fanlight none the less.
"It is a loyal friend and a chivalrous gentleman," said Holmes, holding up a restraining hand. "Let that now and for ever be enough for us."
I do not know how the incriminating book was used. Sir James may have managed it. Or it is more probable that so delicate a task was entrusted to the young lady's father.
The same paper had the first police-court hearing of the proceedings against Miss Kitty Winter on the grave charge of vitriol-throwing.
Such extenuating circumstances came out in the trial that the sentence, as will be remembered, was the lowest that was possible for such an offence.
Sherlock Holmes was threatened with a prosecution for burglary, but when an object is good and a client is sufficiently illustrious, even the rigid British law becomes human and elastic.
The ideas of my friend Watson, though limited, are exceedingly pertinacious. For a long time he has worried me to write an experience of my own.
The following case can hardly fail to do so, as it is among the strangest happenings in my collection, though it chanced that Watson had no note of it in his collection.
A confederate who foresees your conclusions and course of action is always dangerous, but one to whom each development comes as a perpetual surprise, and to whom the future is always a closed book, is, indeed, an ideal helpmate.
I find from my notebook that it was in January, 1903, just after the conclusion of the Boer War, that I had my visit from Mr. James M. Dodd, a big, fresh, sunburned, upstanding Briton.
The good Watson had at that time deserted me for a wife, the only selfish action which I can recall in our association.
It is my habit to sit with my back to the window and to place my visitors in the opposite chair, where the light falls full upon them.
Mr. James M. Dodd seemed somewhat at a loss how to begin the interview. I did not attempt to help him, for his silence gave me more time for observation.
I have found it wise to impress clients with a sense of power, and so I gave him some of my conclusions.
You wear a short beard, which shows that you were not a regular. You have the cut of a riding-man. As to Middlesex, your card has already shown me that you are a stockbroker from Throgmorton Street.
I see no more than you, but I have trained myself to notice what I see. However, Mr. Dodd, it was not to discuss the science of observation that you called upon me this morning.
My dear sir, there is no mystery. Your letter came with that heading, and as you fixed this appointment in very pressing terms it was clear that something sudden and important had occurred.
Yes, indeed. But the letter was written in the afternoon, and a good deal has happened since then. If Colonel Emsworth had not kicked me out----
Well, that was what it amounted to. He is a hard nail, is Colonel Emsworth. The greatest martinet in the Army in his day, and it was a day of rough language, too.
I wasn't satisfied, Mr. Holmes. The whole thing seemed to me so damned unnatural. He was a good lad and he would not drop a pal like that.
It was not like him. Then, again, I happened to know that he was heir to a lot of money, and also that his father and he did not always hit it off too well.
The old man was sometimes a bully, and young Godfrey had too much spirit to stand it. No, I wasn't satisfied, and I determined that I would get to the root of the matter.
It happened, however, that my own affairs needed a lot of straightening out, after two years' absence, and so it is only this week that I have been able to take up Godfrey's case again.
Mr. James M. Dodd appeared to be the sort of person whom it would be better to have as a friend than as an enemy.
You will think, Mr. Holmes, that I returned to my chair in no very happy state of mind. The old man's words seemed to me to bear only one interpretation.
Clearly my poor friend had become involved in some criminal, or, at the least, disreputable, transaction which touched the family honour.
That stern old man had sent his son away and hidden him from the world lest some scandal should come to light.
Godfrey was a reckless fellow. He was easily influenced by those around him. No doubt he had fallen into bad hands and been misled to his ruin.
It was a piteous business, if it was indeed so, but even now it was my duty to hunt him out and see if I could aid him.
I was anxiously pondering the matter when I looked up, and there was Godfrey Emsworth standing before me.
I have said that it was heavily curtained, but now I found that the windows were shuttered as well. Some light, however, was breaking through one of them, so I concentrated my attention upon this.
I was in luck, for the curtain had not been quite closed, and there was a crack in the shutter so that I could see the inside of the room.
It was a cheery place enough, a bright lamp and a blazing fire. Opposite to me was seated the little man whom I had seen in the morning.
Possibly you observed whether it was a broad-leafed paper or of that smaller type which one associates with weeklies.
However, after a long glare of rage he turned upon his heel and walked out of the room. For my part, I took the appointed train in the morning, with the full intention of coming straight to you and asking for your advice and assistance at the appointment for which I had already written.
Still, elementary as it was, there were points of interest and novelty about it which may excuse my placing it upon record.
I now proceeded, using my familiar method of logical analysis, to narrow down the possible solutions.
To the best of my belief there were only the old butler and his wife. They seemed to live in the simplest fashion.
None, unless the little man with the beard acted as such. He seemed, however, to be quite a superior person.
That seems very suggestive. Had you any indication that food was conveyed from the one house to the other?
Now that you mention it, I did see old Ralph carrying a basket down the garden walk and going in the direction of this house.
Yes, I did. I spoke to the station-master and also to the innkeeper in the village. I simply asked if they knew anything of my old comrade, Godfrey Emsworth.
Both of them assured me that he had gone for a voyage round the world. He had come home and then had almost at once started off again.
That was very wise. The matter should certainly be inquired into. I will go back with you to Tuxbury Old Park.
It happened that at the moment I was clearing up the case which my friend Watson has described as that of the Abbey School, in which the Duke of Greyminster was so deeply involved.
I had also a commission from the Sultan of Turkey which called for immediate action, as political consequences of the gravest kind might arise from its neglect.
Therefore it was not until the beginning of the next week, as my diary records, that I was able to start forth on my mission to Bedfordshire in company with Mr. James M. Dodd.
As we drove to Euston we picked up a grave and taciturn gentleman of iron-grey aspect, with whom I had made the necessary arrangements.
"This is an old friend," said I to Dodd. "It is possible that his presence may be entirely unnecessary, and, on the other hand, it may be essential.
The narratives of Watson have accustomed the reader, no doubt, to the fact that I do not waste words or disclose my thoughts while a case is actually under consideration.
Dodd seemed surprised, but nothing more was said and the three of us continued our journey together. In the train I asked Dodd one more question which I wished our companion to hear.
You say that you saw your friend's face quite clearly at the window, so clearly that you are sure of his identity?
I have no doubt about it whatever. His nose was pressed against the glass. The lamplight shone full upon him.
Only in colour. His face was--how shall I describe it?--it was of a fish-belly whiteness. It was bleached.
I was too startled and horrified for the moment. Then I pursued him, as I have told you, but without result.
I had requisitioned the carriage for the day and had asked my elderly friend to remain within it unless we should summon him.
Ralph, a little wrinkled old fellow, was in the conventional costume of black coat and pepper-and-salt trousers, with only one curious variant.
He wore brown leather gloves, which at sight of us he instantly shuffled off, laying them down on the hall-table as we passed in.
I have, as my friend Watson may have remarked, an abnormally acute set of senses, and a faint but incisive scent was apparent.
It seemed to centre on the hall-table. I turned, placed my hat there, knocked it off, stooped to pick it up, and contrived to bring my nose within a foot of the gloves.
Yes, it was undoubtedly from them that the curious tarry odour was oozing. I passed on into the study with my case complete.
Alas, that I should have to show my hand so when I tell my own story! It was by concealing such links in the chain that Watson was enabled to produce his meretricious finales.
Colonel Emsworth was not in his room, but he came quickly enough on receipt of Ralph's message. We heard his quick, heavy step in the passage.
The door was flung open and he rushed in with bristling beard and twisted features, as terrible an old man as ever I have seen.
Have I not told you, you infernal busybody, that you are warned off the premises? Never dare to show your damned face here again.
If you enter again without my leave I shall be within my rights if I use violence. I'll shoot you, sir!
By God, I will! As to you, sir," turning upon me, "I extend the same warning to you. I am familiar with your ignoble profession, but you must take your reputed talents to some other field.
"I cannot leave here," said my client firmly, "until I hear from Godfrey's own lips that he is under no restraint."
"Ralph," he said, "telephone down to the county police and ask the inspector to send up two constables.
"One moment," said I. "You must be aware, Mr. Dodd, that Colonel Emsworth is within his rights and that we have no legal status within his house.
On the other hand, he should recognize that your action is prompted entirely by solicitude for his son.
I venture to hope that, if I were allowed to have five minutes' conversation with Colonel Emsworth, I could certainly alter his view of the matter.
"I am not so easily altered," said the old soldier. "Ralph, do what I have told you. What the devil are you waiting for?
"Nothing of the sort," I said, putting my back to the door. "Any police interference would bring about the very catastrophe which you dread."
I took out my notebook and scribbled one word upon a loose sheet. "That," said I, as I handed it to Colonel Emsworth, "is what has brought us here."
He sat in deep thought, his gaunt hand tugging at his straggling beard. Then he made a gesture of resignation.
Well, if you wish to see Godfrey, you shall. It is no doing of mine, but you have forced my hand. Ralph, tell Mr. Godfrey and Mr. Kent that in five minutes we shall be with them.
At the end of that time we passed down the garden path and found ourselves in front of the mystery house at the end.
"Yes; he is waiting inside." He turned and led us into a large, plainly furnished front room. A man was standing with his back to the fire, and at the sight of him my client sprang forward with outstretched hand.
Don't touch me, Jimmie. Keep your distance. Yes, you may well stare! I don't quite look the smart Lance-Corporal Emsworth, of B Squadron, do I?
His appearance was certainly extraordinary. One could see that he had indeed been a handsome man with clear-cut features sunburned by an African sun, but mottled in patches over this darker surface were curious whitish patches which had bleached his skin.
"That's why I don't court visitors," said he. "I don't mind you, Jimmie, but I could have done without your friend.
I wanted to be sure that all was well with you, Godfrey. I saw you that night when you looked into my window, and I could not let the matter rest till I had cleared things up.
Old Ralph told me you were there, and I couldn't help taking a peep at you. I hoped you would not have seen me, and I had to run to my burrow when I heard the window go up.
"Well, it's not a long story to tell," said he, lighting a cigarette. "You remember that morning fight at Buffelsspruit, outside Pretoria, on the Eastern railway line?
So there you have my tragedy. I hoped against hope, but it was not until I had reached home that the terrible signs which you see upon my face told me that I had not escaped.
What was I to do? I was in this lonely house. We had two servants whom we could utterly trust. There was a house where I could live.
Under pledge of secrecy, Mr. Kent, who is a surgeon, was prepared to stay with me. It seemed simple enough on those lines.
The alternative was a dreadful one--segregation for life among strangers with never a hope of release.
But absolute secrecy was necessary, or even in this quiet country-side there would have been an outcry, and I should have been dragged to my horrible doom.
"This is the gentleman who forced my hand." He unfolded the scrap of paper on which I had written the word "Leprosy."
"And so it was," said I. "Who knows but good may come of it? I understand that only Mr. Kent has seen the patient.
May I ask, sir, if you are an authority on such complaints, which are, I understand, tropical or semi-tropical in their nature?
I have no doubt, sir, that you are fully competent, but I am sure that you will agree that in such a case a second opinion is valuable.
You have avoided this, I understand, for fear that pressure should be put upon you to segregate the patient.
"I foresaw this situation," I explained, "and I have brought with me a friend whose discretion may absolutely be trusted.
I was able once to do him a professional service, and he is ready to advise as a friend rather than as a specialist.
The prospect of an interview with Lord Roberts would not have excited greater wonder and pleasure in a raw subaltern than was now reflected upon the face of Mr. Kent.
Then I will ask Sir James to step this way. He is at present in the carriage outside the door. Meanwhile, Colonel Emsworth, we may perhaps assemble in your study, where I could give the necessary explanations.
And here it is that I miss my Watson. By cunning questions and ejaculations of wonder he could elevate my simple art, which is but systematized common sense, into a prodigy.
When I tell my own story I have no such aid. And yet I will give my process of thought even as I gave it to my small audience, which included Godfrey's mother, in the study of Colonel Emsworth.
There remained the third possibility, into which, rare and unlikely as it was, everything seemed to fit.
Leprosy is not uncommon in South Africa. By some extraordinary chance this youth might have contracted it.
His people would be placed in a very dreadful position, since they would desire to save him from segregation.
Great secrecy would be needed to prevent rumours from getting about and subsequent interference by the authorities.
A devoted medical man, if sufficiently paid, would easily be found to take charge of the sufferer. There would be no reason why the latter should not be allowed freedom after dark.
Bleaching of the skin is a common result of the disease. The case was a strong one--so strong that I determined to act as if it were actually proved.
When on arriving here I noticed that Ralph, who carries out the meals, had gloves which are impregnated with disinfectants, my last doubts were removed.
A single word showed you, sir, that your secret was discovered, and if I wrote rather than said it, it was to prove to you that my discretion was to be trusted.
I was finishing this little analysis of the case when the door was opened and the austere figure of the great dermatologist was ushered in.
But for once his sphinx-like features had relaxed and there was a warm humanity in his eyes. He strode up to Colonel Emsworth and shook him by the hand.
"It is often my lot to bring ill-tidings, and seldom good," said he. "This occasion is the more welcome.
A well-marked case of pseudo-leprosy or ichthyosis, a scale-like affection of the skin, unsightly, obstinate, but possibly curable, and certainly non-infective.
Yes, Mr. Holmes, the coincidence is a remarkable one. But is it coincidence? Are there not subtle forces at work of which we know little?
At any rate, I pledge my professional reputation---- But the lady has fainted! I think that Mr. Kent had better be with her until she recovers from this joyous shock.
It was pleasant to Dr. Watson to find himself once more in the untidy room of the first floor in Baker Street which had been the starting-point of so many remarkable adventures.
He looked round him at the scientific charts upon the wall, the acid-charred bench of chemicals, the violin-case leaning in the corner, the coal-scuttle, which contained of old the pipes and tobacco.
Finally, his eyes came round to the fresh and smiling face of Billy, the young but very wise and tactful page, who had helped a little to fill up the gap of loneliness and isolation which surrounded the saturnine figure of the great detective.
It was seven in the evening of a lovely summer's day, but Dr. Watson was sufficiently familiar with the irregularity of his old friend's hours to feel no surprise at the idea.
Yes, sir; he is very hard at it just now. I'm frightened for his health. He gets paler and thinner, and he eats nothing.
'When will you be pleased to dine, Mr. Holmes?' Mrs. Hudson asked. 'Seven-thirty, the day after to-morrow,' said he.
He's following someone. Yesterday he was out as a workman looking for a job. To-day he was an old woman.
Fairly took me in, he did, and I ought to know his ways by now." Billy pointed with a grin to a very baggy parasol which leaned against the sofa.
Billy sank his voice, as one who discusses great secrets of State. "I don't mind telling you, sir, but it should go no farther.
Yes, sir. They must get it back, sir. Why, we had the Prime Minister and the Home Secretary both sitting on that very sofa.
Mr. Holmes was very nice to them. He soon put them at their ease and promised he would do all he could.
Neither can Mr. Holmes, sir. You see, he don't believe in Mr. Holmes and he was against employing him.
Well, we'll hope he won't fail and that Lord Cantlemere will be confounded. But I say, Billy, what is that curtain for across the window?
We put it at different angles, so that it may seem more life-like. I wouldn't dare touch it if the blind were not down.
"Before my time," said Billy. He drew the window curtains apart and looked out into the street. "There are folk who watch us from over yonder.
Watson had taken a step forward when the bedroom door opened, and the long, thin form of Holmes emerged, his face pale and drawn, but his step and bearing as active as ever.
"That will do, Billy," said he. "You were in danger of your life then, my boy, and I can't do without you just yet.
You can go, Billy. That boy is a problem, Watson. How far am I justified in allowing him to be in danger?
Even my limited sense of humour could evolve a better joke than that. But we may be comfortable in the meantime, may we not?
Is alcohol permitted? The gasogene and cigars are in the old place. Let me see you once more in the customary arm-chair.
You have not, I hope, learned to despise my pipe and my lamentable tobacco? It has to take the place of food these days.
Ah, yes; in case it should come off, it would perhaps be as well that you should burden your memory with the name and address of the murderer.
You can give it to Scotland Yard, with my love and a parting blessing. Sylvius is the name--Count Negretto Sylvius.
Watson's honest face was twitching with anxiety. He knew only too well the immense risks taken by Holmes, and was well aware that what he said was more likely to be under-statement than exaggeration.
Your morals don't improve, Watson. You have added fibbing to your other vices. You bear every sign of the busy medical man, with calls on him every hour.
Yes, the great yellow Mazarin stone. I've cast my net and I have my fish. But I have not got the stone.
What is the use of taking _them_? We can make the world a better place by laying them by the heels. But that is not what I am out for.
Yes, and he's a shark. He bites. The other is Sam Merton, the boxer. Not a bad fellow, Sam, but the Count has used him.
Sam's not a shark. He is a great big silly bull-headed gudgeon. But he is flopping about in my net all the same.
I've been at his very elbow all the morning. You've seen me as an old lady, Watson. I was never more convincing.
Have you seen the dummy? Of course, Billy showed it to you. Well, it may get a bullet through its beautiful head at any moment.
The boy had reappeared in the room with a card upon a tray. Holmes glanced at it with raised eyebrows and an amused smile.
The man himself. I had hardly expected this. Grasp the nettle, Watson! A man of nerve. Possibly you have heard of his reputation as a shooter of big game.
It would indeed be a triumphant ending to his excellent sporting record if he added me to his bag. This is a proof that he feels my toe very close behind his heel.
I probably shall. But not just yet. Would you glance carefully out of the window, Watson, and see if anyone is hanging about in the street?
Look here, Holmes, this is simply impossible. This is a desperate man, who sticks at nothing. He may have come to murder you.
Yes, you can, Watson. And you will, for you have never failed to play the game. I am sure you will play it to the end.
This man has come for his own purpose, but he may stay for mine." Holmes took out his notebook and scribbled a few lines.
Take a cab to Scotland Yard and give this to Youghal of the C.I.D. Come back with the police. The fellow's arrest will follow.
"Before you return I may have just time enough to find out where the stone is." He touched the bell. "I think we will go out through the bedroom.
This second exit is exceedingly useful. I rather want to see my shark without his seeing me, and I have, as you will remember, my own way of doing it.
He was well dressed, but his brilliant necktie, shining pin, and glittering rings were flamboyant in their effect.
As the door closed behind him he looked round him with fierce, startled eyes, like one who suspects a trap at every turn.
Then he gave a violent start as he saw the impassive head and the collar of the dressing-gown which projected above the arm-chair in the window.
At first his expression was one of pure amazement. Then the light of a horrible hope gleamed in his dark, murderous eyes.
He took one more glance round to see that there were no witnesses, and then, on tiptoe, his thick stick half raised, he approached the silent figure.
He was crouching for his final spring and blow when a cool, sardonic voice greeted him from the open bedroom door:
The assassin staggered back, amazement in his convulsed face. For an instant he half raised his loaded cane once more, as if he would turn his violence from the effigy to the original; but there was something in that steady grey eye and mocking smile which caused his hand to sink to his side.
"It's a pretty little thing," said Holmes, advancing towards the image. "Tavernier, the French modeller, made it.
Put your hat and stick on the side-table. Thank you! Pray take a seat. Would you care to put your revolver out also?
Oh, very good, if you prefer to sit upon it. Your visit is really most opportune, for I wanted badly to have a few minutes' chat with you.
I, too, wished to have some words with you, Holmes. That is why I am here. I won't deny that I intended to assault you just now.
"I rather gathered that you had some idea of the sort in your head," said he. "But why these personal attentions?"
Because you have gone out of your way to annoy me. Because you have put your creatures upon my track.
It is a small point, Count Sylvius, but perhaps you would kindly give me my prefix when you address me.
You can understand that, with my routine of work, I should find myself on familiar terms with half the rogues' gallery, and you will agree that exceptions are invidious.
Other people can observe as well as you. Yesterday there was an old sporting man. To-day it was an elderly woman.
Really, sir, you compliment me. Old Baron Dowson said the night before he was hanged that in my case what the law had gained the stage had lost.
Holmes shrugged his shoulders. "You can see in the corner the parasol which you so politely handed to me in the Minories before you began to suspect."
Have seen this humble home again. I was well aware of it. We all have neglected opportunities to deplore.
The Count's knotted brows gathered more heavily over his menacing eyes. "What you say only makes the matter worse.
It was not your agents, but your play-acting, busybody self! You admit that you have dogged me. Why?
You knew that I was after you for that. The real reason why you are here to-night is to find out how much I know about the matter and how far my removal is absolutely essential.
Well, I should say that, from your point of view, it is absolutely essential, for I know all about it, save only one thing, which you are about to tell me.
The Count looked sharply at his companion. "Oh, you want to know that, do you? How the devil should I be able to tell you where it is?"
"You can't bluff me, Count Sylvius." Holmes's eyes, as he gazed at him, contracted and lightened until they were like two menacing points of steel.
Holmes clapped his hands with amusement, and then pointed a derisive finger. "Then you do know. You have admitted it!"
Holmes looked at him thoughtfully, like a master chess-player who meditates his crowning move. Then he threw open the table drawer and drew out a squat notebook.
It's all here, Count. The real facts as to the death of old Mrs. Harold, who left you the Blymer estate, which you so rapidly gambled away.
Plenty more here, Count. Here is the robbery in the train-de-luxe to the Riviera on February 13, 1892.
Then I am right on the others! Now, Count, you are a card-player. When the other fellow has all the trumps, it saves time to throw down your hand.
I have the cabman who took you to Whitehall and the cabman who brought you away. I have the Commissionaire who saw you near the case.
The veins stood out on the Count's forehead. His dark, hairy hands were clenched in a convulsion of restrained emotion.
"That's the hand I play from," said Holmes. "I put it all upon the table. But one card is missing. It's the King of Diamonds.
No? Now, be reasonable, Count. Consider the situation. You are going to be locked up for twenty years.
So is Sam Merton. What good are you going to get out of your diamond? None in the world. But if you hand it over--well, I'll compound a felony.
We don't want you or Sam. We want the stone. Give that up, and so far as I am concerned you can go free so long as you behave yourself in the future.
If you make another slip--well, it will be the last. But this time my commission is to get the stone, not you.
I think, Count, that it would be as well to have your friend Sam at this conference. After all, his interests should be represented.
No violence, Billy. Don't be rough with him. If you tell him that Count Sylvius wants him he will certainly come.
My friend Watson was with me just now. I told him that I had a shark and a gudgeon in my net; now I am drawing the net and up they come together.
The Count had risen from his chair, and his hand was behind his back. Holmes held something half protruding from the pocket of his dressing-gown.
I have often had the same idea. Does it matter very much? After all, Count, your own exit is more likely to be perpendicular than horizontal.
But these anticipations of the future are morbid. Why not give ourselves up to the unrestrained enjoyment of the present?
A sudden wild-beast light sprang up in the dark, menacing eyes of the master criminal. Holmes's figure seemed to grow taller as he grew tense and ready.
"It is no use your fingering your revolver, my friend," he said, in a quiet voice. "You know perfectly well that you dare not use it, even if I gave you time to draw it.
Nasty, noisy things, revolvers, Count. Better stick to air-guns. Ah! I think I hear the fairy footstep of your estimable partner.
The prize-fighter, a heavily built young man with a stupid, obstinate, slab-sided face, stood awkwardly at the door, looking about him with a puzzled expression.
Holmes's debonair manner was a new experience, and though he vaguely felt that it was hostile, he did not know how to counter it.
"No, I expect not," said Holmes. "I think I can promise you that you will feel even less humorous as the evening advances.
Now, look here, Count Sylvius. I'm a busy man and I can't waste time. I'm going into that bedroom. Pray make yourselves quite at home in my absence.
You can explain to your friend how the matter lies without the restraint of my presence. I shall try over the Hoffmann Barcarolle upon my violin.
In five minutes I shall return for your final answer. You quite grasp the alternative, do you not? Shall we take you, or shall we have the stone?
Holmes withdrew, picking up his violin from the corner as he passed. A few moments later the long-drawn, wailing notes of that most haunting of tunes came faintly through the closed door of the bedroom.
"What is it, then?" asked Merton anxiously, as his companion turned to him. "Does he know about the stone?"
"Half a mo'," said the boxer, looking suspiciously at the bedroom door. "He's a leary cove that wants watching.
"That's right. Maybe somebody's behind a curtain. Too many curtains in this room." As he looked round he suddenly saw for the first time the effigy in the window, and stood staring and pointing, too amazed for words.
A fake, is it? Well, strike me! Madame Tussaud ain't in it. It's the living spit of him, gown and all.
Oh, confound the curtains! We are wasting our time, and there is none too much. He can lag us over this stone.
He is armed and ready. If we shot him we could hardly get away in a place like this. Besides, it's likely enough that the police know whatever evidence he has got.
There was a vague sound which seemed to come from the window. Both men sprang round, but all was quiet.
"Something in the street," said Merton. "Now look here, guv'nor, you've got the brains. Surely you can think a way out of it.
"I've fooled better men than he," the Count answered. "The stone is here in my secret pocket. I take no chances leaving it about.
It can be out of England to-night and cut into four pieces in Amsterdam before Sunday. He knows nothing of Van Seddar.
He _was_. But now he must get off by the next boat. One or other of us must slip round with the stone to Lime Street and tell him.
"Well, he must take it as it is and chance it. There's not a moment to lose." Again, with the sense of danger which becomes an instinct with the sportsman, he paused and looked hard at the window.
"As to Holmes," he continued, "we can fool him easily enough. You see, the damned fool won't arrest us if he can get the stone.
Well, we'll promise him the stone. We'll put him on the wrong track about it, and before he finds that it is the wrong track it will be in Holland and we out of the country.
You go on and tell the Dutchman to get a move on him. I'll see this sucker and fill him up with a bogus confession.
I'll tell him that the stone is in Liverpool. Confound that whining music; it gets on my nerves! By the time he finds it isn't in Liverpool it will be in quarters and we on the blue water.
Where could I have it safer? If we could take it out of Whitehall someone else could surely take it out of my lodgings.
Count Sylvius cast a somewhat unflattering glance at his associate, and disregarded the unwashed hand which was extended towards him.
What--d'ye think I'm going to snatch it off you? See here, mister, I'm getting a bit tired of your ways.
Well, well; no offence, Sam. We can't afford to quarrel. Come over to the window if you want to see the beauty properly.
With a single spring Holmes had leaped from the dummy's chair and had grasped the precious jewel. He held it now in one hand, while his other pointed a revolver at the Count's head.
The two villains staggered back in utter amazement. Before they had recovered Holmes had pressed the electric bell.
No violence, gentlemen--no violence, I beg of you! Consider the furniture! It must be very clear to you that your position is an impossible one.
Your surprise is very natural. You are not aware that a second door from my bedroom leads behind that curtain.
I fancied that you must have heard me when I displaced the figure, but luck was on my side. It gave me a chance of listening to your racy conversation which would have been painfully constrained had you been aware of my presence.
Sam Merton's slow intellect had only gradually appreciated the situation. Now, as the sound of heavy steps came from the stairs outside, he broke silence at last.
"Tut, tut!" Holmes answered. "You are perfectly right. Let it play! These modern gramophones are a remarkable invention."
There was an inrush of police, the handcuffs clicked and the criminals were led to the waiting cab. Watson lingered with Holmes, congratulating him upon this fresh leaf added to his laurels.
"Show him up, Billy. This is the eminent peer who represents the very highest interests," said Holmes.
He is an excellent and loyal person, but rather of the old regime. Shall we make him unbend? Dare we venture upon a slight liberty?
The door opened to admit a thin, austere figure with a hatchet face and drooping mid-Victorian whiskers of a glossy blackness which hardly corresponded with the rounded shoulders and feeble gait.
How-do-you-do, Lord Cantlemere? It is chilly, for the time of year, but rather warm indoors. May I take your overcoat?
Pray allow me! My friend Dr. Watson would assure you that these changes of temperature are most insidious.
I am quite comfortable, sir. I have no need to stay. I have simply looked in to know how your self-appointed task was progressing.
Every man finds his limitations, Mr. Holmes, but at least it cures us of the weakness of self-satisfaction.
You apply for my advice rather late in the day. I thought that you had your own all-sufficient methods.
It is as well to have our plans ready. Now, what would you regard as final evidence against the receiver?
You take a great liberty, Mr. Holmes. In fifty years of official life I cannot recall such a case. I am a busy man, sir, engaged upon important affairs, and I have no time or taste for foolish jokes.
I may tell you frankly, sir, that I have never been a believer in your powers, and that I have always been of the opinion that the matter was far safer in the hands of the regular police force.
"One moment, sir," said he. "To actually go off with the Mazarin stone would be a more serious offence than to be found in temporary possession of it."
An instant later the amazed peer was standing, blinking and stammering, with the great yellow stone on his shaking palm.
"Too bad, Lord Cantlemere, too bad!" cried Holmes. "My old friend here will tell you that I have an impish habit of practical joking.
Also that I can never resist a dramatic situation. I took the liberty--the very great liberty, I admit--of putting the stone into your pocket at the beginning of our interview.
Sir, I am bewildered. But--yes--it is indeed the Mazarin stone. We are greatly your debtors, Mr. Holmes.
Your sense of humour may, as you admit, be somewhat perverted, and its exhibition remarkably untimely, but at least I withdraw any reflection I have made upon your amazing professional powers.
Billy, you will show his lordship out, and tell Mrs. Hudson that I should be glad if she would send up dinner for two as soon as possible.
I don't think that any of my adventures with Mr. Sherlock Holmes opened quite so abruptly, or so dramatically, as that which I associate with The Three Gables.
I had not seen Holmes for some days, and had no idea of the new channel into which his activities had been directed.
His broad face and flattened nose were thrust forward, as his sullen dark eyes, with a smouldering gleam of malice in them, turned from one of us to the other.
"Oh! it's you, is it?" said our visitor, coming with an unpleasant, stealthy step round the angle of the table.
See here, Masser Holmes, you keep your hands out of other folks' business. Leave folks to manage their own affairs.
"Oh! it's fine, is it?" growled the savage. "It won't be so damn fine if I have to trim you up a bit.
I've handled your kind before now, and they didn't look fine when I was through with them. Look at that, Masser Holmes!
He swung a huge knotted lump of a fist under my friend's nose. Holmes examined it closely with an air of great interest.
It may have been the icy coolness of my friend, or it may have been the slight clatter which I made as I picked up the poker.
"Well, I've given you fair warnin'," said he. "I've a friend that's interested out Harrow way--you know what I'm meaning--and he don't intend to have no buttin' in by you.
Got that? You ain't the law, and I ain't the law either, and if you come in I'll be on hand also. Don't you forget it.
"It is certainly the last thing you need," said Holmes, staring at our visitor's hideous mouth. "But it was the killing of young Perkins outside the Holborn Bar---- What!
The negro had sprung back, and his face was leaden. "I won't listen to no such talk," said he. "What have I to do with this 'ere Perkins, Masser Holmes?
"Yes, you'll tell the magistrate about it, Steve," said Holmes. "I've been watching you and Barney Stockdale----"
Why, there ain't no secret about that, Masser Holmes. It was that same genelman that you have just done gone mention.
S'elp me. I don't know, Masser Holmes. He just say, 'Steve, you go see Mr. Holmes, and tell him his life ain't safe if he go down Harrow way.'
Without waiting for any further questioning, our visitor bolted out of the room almost as precipitately as he had entered.
I am glad you were not forced to break his woolly head, Watson. I observed your manoeuvres with the poker.
But he is really rather a harmless fellow, a great muscular, foolish, blustering baby, and easily cowed, as you have seen.
He is one of the Spencer John gang and has taken part in some dirty work of late which I may clear up when I have time.
His immediate principal, Barney, is a more astute person. They specialize in assaults, intimidation, and the like.
It is this Harrow Weald case. It decides me to look into the matter, for if it is worth anyone's while to take so much trouble, there must be something in it.
I was going to tell you when we had this comic interlude. Here is Mrs. Maberley's note. If you care to come with me we will wire her and go out at once.
I have had a succession of strange incidents occur to me in connection with this house, and I should much value your advice.
You would find me at home any time to-morrow. The house is within a short walk of the Weald Station. I believe that my late husband, Mortimer Maberley, was one of your early clients.
"So that's that!" said Holmes. "And now, if you can spare the time, Watson, we will get upon our way."
A short railway journey, and a shorter drive, brought us to the house, a brick and timber villa, standing in its own acre of undeveloped grassland.
None the less, we found the house to be well furnished, and the lady who received us was a most engaging elderly person, who bore every mark of refinement and culture.
"I remember your husband well, madam," said Holmes, "though it is some years since he used my services in some trifling matter."
Dear me! Are you the mother of Douglas Maberley? I knew him slightly. But, of course, all London knew him.
I am sorry. One could not connect death with such a man. I have never known anyone so vitally alive. He lived intensely--every fibre of him!
Too intensely, Mr. Holmes. That was the ruin of him. You remember him as he was--debonair and splendid.
You did not see the moody, morose, brooding creature into which he developed. His heart was broken. In a single month I seemed to see my gallant boy turn into a worn-out cynical man.
'Then it must be nothing,' said I. And there the matter was left, but the whole thing seemed to me to be so unusual that I thought----
Holmes raised his hand for silence. Then he strode across the room, flung open the door, and dragged in a great gaunt woman whom he had seized by the shoulder.
Well, ma'am, I was comin' in to ask if the visitors was stayin' for lunch when this man jumped out at me.
I have been listening to her for the last five minutes, but did not wish to interrupt your most interesting narrative.
Susan turned a sulky but amazed face upon her captor. "Who be you, anyhow, and what right have you a-pullin' me about like this?"
It was merely that I wished to ask a question in your presence. Did you, Mrs. Maberley, mention to anyone that you were going to write to me and consult me?
Exactly. Now, Susan, to whom was it that you wrote or sent a message to say that your mistress was asking advice from me?
Now, Susan, wheezy people may not live long, you know. It's a wicked thing to tell fibs. Whom did you tell?
"Susan!" cried her mistress, "I believe you are a bad, treacherous woman. I remember now that I saw you speaking to someone over the hedge."
I was not sure, but I know now. Well now, Susan, it will be worth ten pounds to you if you will tell me who is at the back of Barney.
So, a rich man? No; you smiled--a rich woman. Now we have got so far, you may as well give the name and earn the tenner.
"I am clearing out of here. I've had enough of you all. I'll send for my box to-morrow." She flounced for the door.
"Good-bye, Susan. Paregoric is the stuff.... Now," he continued, turning suddenly from lively to severe when the door had closed behind the flushed and angry woman, "this gang means business.
Look how close they play the game. Your letter to me had the 10 p.m. postmark. And yet Susan passes the word to Barney.
Barney has time to go to his employer and get instructions; he or she--I incline to the latter from Susan's grin when she thought I had blundered--forms a plan.
Black Steve is called in, and I am warned off by eleven o'clock next morning. That's quick work, you know.
I was wondering whether he could have buried something. Of course, when people bury treasure nowadays they do it in the Post Office bank.
But there are always some lunatics about. It would be a dull world without them. At first I thought of some buried valuable.
But why, in that case, should they want your furniture? You don't happen to have a Raphael or a first folio Shakespeare without knowing it?
That would hardly justify all this mystery. Besides, why should they not openly state what they want?
If they covet your tea-set, they can surely offer a price for it without buying you out, lock, stock, and barrel.
No, as I read it, there is something which you do not know that you have, and which you would not give up if you did know.
Let us see whether by this purely mental analysis we can get it to a finer point. You have been in this house a year.
All the better. During this long period no one wants anything from you. Now suddenly within three or four days you have urgent demands.
"It can only mean," said I, "that the object, whatever it may be, has only just come into the house."
Indeed! That is very remarkable. Well, I think we had best let matters develop a little further until we have clearer data.
Who knows? The matter is certainly obscure. If I can't find what they are after, I must approach the matter from the other end, and try to get at the principal.
I don't think we shall find him in the Directory. Honest business men don't conceal their place of business.
Well, you will let me know any fresh development. I have taken up your case, and you may rely upon it that I shall see it through.
As we passed through the hall Holmes's eyes, which missed nothing, lighted upon several trunks and cases which were piled in the corner.
But you said--why, surely this might be the missing link. How do we know that there is not something of value there?
There could not possibly be, Mr. Holmes. Poor Douglas had only his pay and a small annuity. What could he have of value?
"Delay no longer, Mrs. Maberley," he said at last. "Have these things taken upstairs to your bedroom.
Examine them as soon as possible and see what they contain. I will come to-morrow and hear your report.
It was quite evident that The Three Gables was under very close surveillance, for as we came round the high hedge at the end of the lane there was the negro prize-fighter standing in the shadow.
We came on him quite suddenly, and a grim and menacing figure he looked in that lonely place. Holmes clapped his hand to his pocket.
Well, Masser Holmes, I done gone think over what you said, and I don't want no more talk about that affair of Masser Perkins.
So help me the Lord! Masser Holmes, I told you the truth before. I don't know. My boss Barney gives me orders and that's all.
Well, just bear in mind, Steve, that the lady in that house, and everything under that roof, is under my protection.
"I've got him thoroughly frightened for his own skin, Watson," Holmes remarked as we walked on. "I think he would double-cross his employer if he knew who he was.
It was lucky I had some knowledge of the Spencer John crowd, and that Steve was one of them. Now, Watson, this is a case for Langdale Pike, and I am going to see him now.
I saw no more of Holmes during the day, but I could well imagine how he spent it, for Langdale Pike was his human book of reference upon all matters of social scandal.
This strange, languid creature spent his waking hours in the bow window of a St. James's Street club, and was the receiving-station, as well as the transmitter, for all the gossip of the Metropolis.
He made, it was said, a four-figure income by the paragraphs which he contributed every week to the garbage papers which cater for an inquisitive public.
If ever, far down in the turbid depths of London life, there was some strange swirl or eddy, it was marked with automatic exactness by this human dial upon the surface.
When I met my friend in his room early next morning, I was conscious from his bearing that all was well, but none the less a most unpleasant surprise was awaiting us.
This Sutro, of course, is her lawyer. I made a mistake, I fear, in not asking you to spend the night on guard.
This fellow has clearly proved a broken reed. Well, there is nothing for it but another journey to Harrow Weald.
We found The Three Gables a very different establishment to the orderly household of the previous day.
A small group of idlers had assembled at the garden gate, while a couple of constables were examining the windows and the geranium beds.
Within we met a grey old gentleman, who introduced himself as the lawyer, together with a bustling, rubicund Inspector, who greeted Holmes as an old friend.
Well, Mr. Holmes, no chance for you in this case, I'm afraid. Just a common, ordinary burglary, and well within the capacity of the poor old police.
Quite so. We know pretty well who the men are and where to find them. It is that gang of Barney Stockdale, with the big nigger in it--they've been seen about here.
Well, they don't seem to have got much. Mrs. Maberley was chloroformed and the house was---- Ah! here is the lady herself.
Our friend of yesterday, looking very pale and ill, had entered the room, leaning upon a little maid-servant.
"You gave me good advice, Mr. Holmes," said she, smiling ruefully. "Alas, I did not take it! I did not wish to trouble Mr. Sutro, and so I was unprotected."
Mr. Holmes advised me to have some friend in the house. I neglected his advice, and I have paid for it.
There is really so little to tell. I have no doubt that wicked Susan had planned an entrance for them.
They must have known the house to an inch. I was conscious for a moment of the chloroform rag which was thrust over my mouth, but I have no notion how long I may have been senseless.
When I woke, one man was at the bedside and another was rising with a bundle in his hand from among my son's baggage, which was partially opened and littered over the floor.
I clung to him, but he shook me off, and the other may have struck me, for I can remember no more. Mary the maid heard the noise and began screaming out of the window.
Well, I don't think there is anything of value missing. I am sure there was nothing in my son's trunks.
There was one sheet of paper which I may have torn from the man that I grasped. It was lying all crumpled on the floor.
"Which means that it is not of much use," said the Inspector. "Now if it had been in the burglar's----"
"I never pass anything, however trifling," said he, with some pomposity. "That is my advice to you, Mr. Holmes.
In twenty-five years' experience I have learned my lesson. There is always the chance of finger-marks or something.
"It may certainly prove to be the end of a queer tale," said Holmes. "You have noticed the number on the top of the page.
It seems a queer thing to break into a house in order to steal such papers as that. Does it suggest anything to you, Inspector?
Yes, sir; it suggests that in their hurry the rascals just grabbed at what came first to hand. I wish them joy of what they got.
Well, they found nothing valuable downstairs, so they tried their luck upstairs. That is how I read it.
"I must think it over, Inspector. Come to the window, Watson." Then, as we stood together, he read over the fragment of paper.
She smiled--yes, by Heaven! she smiled, like the heartless fiend she was, as he looked up at her. It was at that moment that love died and hate was born.
Man must live for something. If it is not for your embrace, my lady, then it shall surely be for your undoing and my complete revenge.
"Queer grammar!" said Holmes, with a smile, as he handed the paper back to the Inspector. "Did you notice how the 'he' suddenly changed to 'my.'
The writer was so carried away by his own story that he imagined himself at the supreme moment to be the hero.
"It seemed mighty poor stuff," said the Inspector, as he replaced it in his book. "What! are you off, Mr.
I don't think there is anything more for me to do now that the case is in such capable hands. By the way, Mrs. Maberley, did you say you wished to travel?
"Quite so. Round the world. Well, good morning. I may drop you a line in the evening." As we passed the window I caught a glimpse of the Inspector's smile and shake of the head.
"These clever fellows have always a touch of madness." That was what I read in the Inspector's smile.
"Now, Watson, we are at the last lap of our little journey," said Holmes, when we were back in the roar of Central London once more.
I think we had best clear the matter up at once, and it would be well that you should come with me, for it is safer to have a witness when you are dealing with such a lady as Isadora Klein.
We had taken a cab and were speeding to some address in Grosvenor Square. Holmes had been sunk in thought, but he roused himself suddenly.
No, I can't say that I do. I only gather that we are going to see the lady who is behind all this mischief.
Exactly! But does the name Isadora Klein convey nothing to you? She was, of course, the celebrated beauty.
There was never a woman to touch her. She is pure Spanish, the real blood of the masterful Conquistadors, and her people have been leaders in Pernambuco for generations.
She married the aged German sugar king, Klein, and presently found herself the richest as well as the most lovely widow upon earth.
Then there was an interval of adventure when she pleased her own tastes. She had several lovers, and Douglas Maberley, one of the most striking men in London, was one of them.
It was by all accounts more than an adventure with him. He was not a Society butterfly, but a strong, proud man who gave and expected all.
But she is the '_belle dame sans merci_' of fiction. When her caprice is satisfied, the matter is ended, and if the other party in the matter can't take her word for it, she knows how to bring it home to him.
Ah! you are piecing it together now. I hear that she is about to marry the young Duke of Lomond, who might almost be her son.
His Grace's ma might overlook the age, but a big scandal would be a different matter, so it is imperative---- Ah!
It was one of the finest corner-houses of the West End. A machine-like footman took up our cards and returned with word that the lady was not at home.
"Good," Holmes answered. "That means that we shall not have to wait. Kindly give this note to your mistress."
It did--with amazing celerity. A minute later we were in an Arabian-nights' drawing-room, vast and wonderful, in a half gloom, picked out with an occasional pink electric light.
The lady had come, I felt, to that time of life when even the proudest beauty finds the half-light more welcome.
She rose from a settee as we entered: tall, queenly, a perfect figure, a lovely mask-like face, with two wonderful Spanish eyes which looked murder at us both.
I need not explain, madame. I have too much respect for your intelligence to do so--though I confess that intelligence has been surprisingly at fault of late.
By supposing that your hired bullies could frighten me from my work. Surely no man would take up my profession if it were not that danger attracts him.
We had not got half-way to the door before she had overtaken us and was holding his arm. She had turned in a moment from steel to velvet.
Come and sit down, gentlemen. Let us talk this matter over. I feel that I may be frank with you, Mr. Holmes.
You have the feelings of a gentleman. How quick a woman's instinct is to find it out. I will treat you as a friend.
I cannot promise to reciprocate, madame. I am not the law, but I represent justice so far as my feeble powers go.
What was really foolish, madame, is that you have placed yourself in the power of a band of rascals who may blackmail or give you away.
No, no! I am not so simple. Since I have promised to be frank, I may say that no one, save Barney Stockdale and Susan, his wife, have the least idea who their employer is.
As to them, well, it is not the first----" She smiled and nodded, with a charming coquettish intimacy.
Such hounds have a way sooner or later of biting the hand that feeds them. They will be arrested for this burglary.
She broke into a ripple of laughter, and walked to the fireplace. There was a calcined mass which she broke up with the poker.
"That seals your fate," he said coldly. "You are very prompt in your actions, madame, but you have overdone it on this occasion."
But you must look at it with my eyes, Mr. Holmes. You must realize it from the point of view of a woman who sees all her life's ambition about to be ruined at the last moment.
Yes, yes! I admit it. He was a dear boy, Douglas, but it so chanced that he could not fit into my plans.
He wanted marriage--marriage, Mr. Holmes--with a penniless commoner. Nothing less would serve him. Then he became pertinacious.
Because I had given he seemed to think that I still must give, and to him only. It was intolerable. At last I had to make him realize it.
You do indeed seem to know everything. Well, it is true. Barney and the boys drove him away, and were, I admit, a little rough in doing so.
But what did he do then? Could I have believed that a gentleman would do such an act? He wrote a book in which he described his own story.
I, of course, was the wolf; he the lamb. It was all there, under different names, of course; but who in all London would have failed to recognize it?
It was as if the air of Italy had got into his blood and brought with it the old cruel Italian spirit.
He wrote to me and sent me a copy of his book that I might have the torture of anticipation. There were two copies, he said--one for me, one for his publisher.
I knew who his publisher was. It is not his only novel, you know. I found out that he had not heard from Italy.
Then came Douglas's sudden death. So long as that other manuscript was in the world there was no safety for me.
Of course, it must be among his effects, and these would be returned to his mother. I set the gang at work.
One of them got into the house as servant. I wanted to do the thing honestly. I really and truly did.
I was ready to buy the house and everything in it. I offered any price she cared to ask. I only tried the other way when everything else had failed.
Now, Mr. Holmes, granting that I was too hard on Douglas--and, God knows, I am sorry for it!--what else could I do with my whole future at stake?
"Well, well," said he, "I suppose I shall have to compound a felony as usual. How much does it cost to go round the world in first-class style?"
Very good. I think you will sign me a cheque for that, and I will see that it comes to Mrs. Maberley.
You owe her a little change of air. Meantime, lady"--he wagged a cautionary forefinger--"have a care!
Holmes had read carefully a note which the last post had brought him. Then, with the dry chuckle which was his nearest approach to a laugh, he tossed it over to me.
Our client, Mr. Robert Ferguson, of Ferguson and Muirhead, tea brokers, of Mincing Lane, has made some inquiry from us in a communication of even date concerning vampires.
But what do we know about vampires? Does it come within our purview either? Anything is better than stagnation, but really we seem to have been switched on to a Grimm's fairy tale.
I leaned back and took down the great index volume to which he referred. Holmes balanced it on his knee and his eyes moved slowly and lovingly over the record of old cases, mixed with the accumulated information of a lifetime.
"Voyage of the Gloria Scott," he read. "That was a bad business. I have some recollection that you made a record of it, Watson, though I was unable to congratulate you upon the result.
Victor Lynch, the forger. Venomous lizard or gila. Remarkable case, that! Vittoria, the circus belle.
Vanderbilt and the Yeggman. Vipers. Vigor, the Hammersmith wonder. Hullo! Hullo! Good old index. You can't beat it.
Listen to this, Watson. Vampirism in Hungary. And again, Vampires in Transylvania." He turned over the pages with eagerness, but after a short intent perusal he threw down the great book with a snarl of disappointment.
Rubbish, Watson, rubbish! What have we to do with walking corpses who can only be held in their grave by stakes driven through their hearts?
"But surely," said I, "the vampire was not necessarily a dead man? A living person might have the habit.
You are right, Watson. It mentions the legend in one of these references. But are we to give serious attention to such things?
This Agency stands flat-footed upon the ground, and there it must remain. The world is big enough for us.
No ghosts need apply. I fear that we cannot take Mr. Robert Ferguson very seriously. Possibly this note may be from him, and may throw some light upon what is worrying him.
He took up a second letter which had lain unnoticed upon the table whilst he had been absorbed with the first.
This he began to read with a smile of amusement upon his face which gradually faded away into an expression of intense interest and concentration.
When he had finished he sat for some little time lost in thought with the letter dangling from his fingers.
I know that country, Holmes. It is full of old houses which are named after the men who built them centuries ago.
You get Odley's and Harvey's and Carriton's--the folk are forgotten but their names live in their houses.
I rather fancy we shall know a good deal more about Cheeseman's, Lamberley, before we are through. The letter is, as I had hoped, from Robert Ferguson.
DEAR MR. HOLMES, (it said)--I have been recommended to you by my lawyers, but indeed the matter is so extraordinarily delicate that it is most difficult to discuss.
He felt there were sides of her character which he could never explore or understand. This was the more painful as she was as loving a wife as a man could have--to all appearance absolutely devoted.
The lady began to show some curious traits quite alien to her ordinarily sweet and gentle disposition.
The gentleman had been married twice and he had one son by the first wife. This boy was now fifteen, a very charming and affectionate youth, though unhappily injured through an accident in childhood.
Twice the wife was caught in the act of assaulting this poor lad in the most unprovoked way. Once she struck him with a stick and left a great weal on his arm.
This was a small matter, however, compared with her conduct to her own child, a dear boy just under one year of age.
On one occasion about a month ago this child had been left by its nurse for a few minutes. A loud cry from the baby, as of pain, called the nurse back.
As she ran into the room she saw her employer, the lady, leaning over the baby and apparently biting his neck.
It left, however, a terrible impression upon the nurse's mind, and from that time she began to watch her mistress closely, and to keep a closer guard upon the baby, whom she tenderly loved.
It seemed to her that even as she watched the mother, so the mother watched her, and that every time she was compelled to leave the baby alone the mother was waiting to get at it.
Day and night the nurse covered the child, and day and night the silent, watchful mother seemed to be lying in wait as a wolf waits for a lamb.
It must read most incredible to you, and yet I beg you to take it seriously, for a child's life and a man's sanity may depend upon it.
To him it seemed as wild a tale as it may now seem to you. He knew his wife to be a loving wife, and, save for the assaults upon her stepson, a loving mother.
Whilst they were talking, a sudden cry of pain was heard. Nurse and master rushed together to the nursery.
Imagine his feelings, Mr. Holmes, as he saw his wife rise from a kneeling position beside the cot, and saw blood upon the child's exposed neck and upon the sheet.
With a cry of horror, he turned his wife's face to the light and saw blood all round her lips. It was she--she beyond all question--who had drunk the poor baby's blood.
So the matter stands. She is now confined to her room. There has been no explanation. The husband is half demented.
He knows, and I know, little of Vampirism beyond the name. We had thought it was some wild tale of foreign parts.
And yet here in the very heart of the English Sussex--well, all this can be discussed with you in the morning.
Will you see me? Will you use your great powers in aiding a distracted man? If so, kindly wire to Ferguson, Cheeseman's, Lamberley, and I will be at your rooms by ten o'clock.
PS.--I believe your friend Watson played Rugby for Blackheath when I was three-quarter for Richmond. It is the only personal introduction which I can give.
"Of course I remember him," said I, as I laid down the letter. "Big Bob Ferguson, the finest three-quarter Richmond ever had.
"I never get your limits, Watson," said he. "There are unexplored possibilities about you. Take a wire down, like a good fellow.
We must not let him think that this Agency is a home for the weak-minded. Of course it is his case. Send him that wire and let the matter rest till morning.
There is surely nothing in life more painful than to meet the wreck of a fine athlete whom one has known in his prime.
His great frame had fallen in, his flaxen hair was scanty, and his shoulders were bowed. I fear that I roused corresponding emotions in him.
"Hullo, Watson," said he, and his voice was still deep and hearty. "You don't look quite the man you did when I threw you over the ropes into the crowd at the Old Deer Park.
I expect I have changed a bit also. But it's this last day or two that has aged me. I see by your telegram, Mr. Holmes, that it is no use my pretending to be anyone's deputy.
Of course it is. But you can imagine how difficult it is when you are speaking of the one woman whom you are bound to protect and help.
What can I do? How am I to go to the police with such a story? And yet the kiddies have got to be protected.
Is it madness, Mr. Holmes? Is it something in the blood? Have you any similar case in your experience?
Very naturally, Mr. Ferguson. Now sit here and pull yourself together and give me a few clear answers.
I can assure you that I am very far from being at my wits' end, and that I am confident we shall find some solution.
We had a dreadful scene. She is a most loving woman, Mr. Holmes. If ever a woman loved a man with all her heart and soul, she loves me.
She was cut to the heart that I should have discovered this horrible, this incredible, secret. She would not even speak.
She gave no answer to my reproaches, save to gaze at me with a sort of wild, despairing look in her eyes.
Then she rushed to her room and locked herself in. Since then she has refused to see me. She has a maid who was with her before her marriage, Dolores by name--a friend rather than a servant.
Mrs. Mason, the nurse, has sworn that she will not leave it night or day. I can absolutely trust her.
I am more uneasy about poor little Jack, for, as I told you in my note, he has twice been assaulted by her.
"No; she struck him savagely. It is the more terrible as he is a poor little inoffensive cripple." Ferguson's gaunt features softened as he spoke of his boy.
You would think that the dear lad's condition would soften anyone's heart. A fall in childhood and a twisted spine, Mr. Holmes.
Holmes had picked up the letter of yesterday and was reading it over. "What other inmates are there in your house, Mr.
Two servants who have not been long with us. One stable-hand, Michael, who sleeps in the house. My wife, myself, my boy Jack, baby, Dolores, and Mrs. Mason.
"I fancy," said he, "that I may be of more use at Lamberley than here. It is eminently a case for personal investigation.
If the lady remains in her room, our presence could not annoy or inconvenience her. Of course, we would stay at the inn.
Of course we could come. There is a lull at present. I can give you my undivided energies. Watson, of course, comes with us.
But there are one or two points upon which I wish to be very sure before I start. This unhappy lady, as I understand it, has appeared to assault both the children, her own baby and your little son?
Well, that is not unknown among stepmothers. A posthumous jealousy, we will say. Is the lady jealous by nature?
But the boy--he is fifteen, I understand, and probably very developed in mind, since his body has been circumscribed in action.
Never in the world could there be so devoted a son. My life is his life. He is absorbed in what I say or do.
No doubt you and the boy were great comrades before this second marriage. You were thrown very close together, were you not?
He would certainly seem to be a most interesting lad. There is one other point about these assaults. Were the strange attacks upon the baby and the assaults upon your son at the same period?
In the first case it was so. It was as if some frenzy had seized her, and she had vented her rage upon both.
In the second case it was only Jack who suffered. Mrs. Mason had no complaint to make about the baby.
Possibly not. One forms provisional theories and waits for time or fuller knowledge to explode them. A bad habit, Mr. Ferguson; but human nature is weak.
I fear that your old friend here has given an exaggerated view of my scientific methods. However, I will only say at the present stage that your problem does not appear to me to be insoluble, and that you may expect to find us at Victoria at two o'clock.
It was a large, straggling building, very old in the centre, very new at the wings, with towering Tudor chimneys and a lichen-spotted, high-pitched roof of Horsham slabs.
The doorsteps were worn into curves, and the ancient tiles which lined the porch were marked with the rebus of a cheese and a man, after the original builder.
Within, the ceilings were corrugated with heavy oaken beams, and the uneven floors sagged into sharp curves.
There was one very large central room, into which Ferguson led us. Here, in a huge old-fashioned fireplace with an iron screen behind it dated 1670, there blazed and spluttered a splendid log fire.
The room, as I gazed round, was a most singular mixture of dates and of places. The half-panelled walls may well have belonged to the original yeoman farmer of the seventeenth century.
Holmes rose, with that quick curiosity which sprang from his eager mind, and examined them with some care.
A spaniel had lain in a basket in the corner. It came slowly forward towards its master, walking with difficulty.
That's what puzzled the vet. A sort of paralysis. Spinal meningitis, he thought. But it is passing. He'll be all right soon--won't you, Carlo?
A shiver of assent passed through the drooping tail. The dog's mournful eyes passed from one of us to the other.
For God's sake, what do you think, Mr. Holmes? It may be a mere intellectual puzzle to you, but it is life and death to me!
My wife a would-be murderer--my child in constant danger! Don't play with me, Mr. Holmes. It is too terribly serious.
"I fear that there is pain for you, Mr. Ferguson, whatever the solution may be," said he. "I would spare you all I can.
I cannot say more for the instant, but before I leave this house I hope I may have something definite.
Please God you may! If you will excuse me, gentlemen, I will go up to my wife's room and see if there has been any change.
He was away some minutes, during which Holmes resumed his examination of the curiosities upon the wall.
When our host returned it was clear from his downcast face that he had made no progress. He brought with him a tall, slim, brown-faced girl.
"She verra ill," cried the girl, looking with indignant eyes at her master. "She no ask for food. She verra ill. She need doctor.
I followed the girl, who was quivering with strong emotion, up the staircase and down an ancient corridor.
At the end was an iron-clamped and massive door. It struck me as I looked at it that if Ferguson tried to force his way to his wife he would find it no easy matter.
The girl drew a key from her pocket, and the heavy oaken planks creaked upon their old hinges. I passed in and she swiftly followed, fastening the door behind her.
On the bed a woman was lying who was clearly in a high fever. She was only half conscious, but as I entered she raised a pair of frightened but beautiful eyes and glared at me in apprehension.
Seeing a stranger, she appeared to be relieved, and sank back with a sigh upon the pillow. I stepped up to her with a few reassuring words, and she lay still while I took her pulse and temperature.
Both were high, and yet my impression was that the condition was rather that of mental and nervous excitement than of any actual seizure.
"I will not see him. I will not see him." Then she seemed to wander off into delirium. "A fiend! A fiend!
The woman must have some strange delusion. I could not see honest Bob Ferguson in the character of fiend or devil.
He loves me. Yes. But do I not love him? Do I not love him even to sacrifice myself rather than break his dear heart.
No, no; I cannot forget those terrible words nor the look upon his face. I will not see him. Go now.
You can do nothing for me. Tell him only one thing. I want my child. I have a right to my child. That is the only message I can send him.
I returned to the room downstairs, where Ferguson and Holmes still sat by the fire. Ferguson listened moodily to my account of the interview.
"How can I send her the child?" he said. "How do I know what strange impulse might come upon her? How can I ever forget how she rose from beside it with its blood upon her lips?"
A smart maid, the only modern thing which we had seen in the house, had brought in some tea. As she was serving it the door opened and a youth entered the room.
He was a remarkable lad, pale-faced and fair-haired, with excitable light blue eyes which blazed into a sudden flame of emotion and joy as they rested upon his father.
"Oh, daddy," he cried, "I did not know that you were due yet. I should have been here to meet you. Oh, I am so glad to see you!"
"Dear old chap," said he, patting the flaxen head with a very tender hand. "I came early because my friends, Mr. Holmes and Dr. Watson, have been persuaded to come down and spend an evening with us."
"What about your other child, Mr. Ferguson?" asked Holmes. "Might we make the acquaintance of the baby?"
"Ask Mrs. Mason to bring baby down," said Ferguson. The boy went off with a curious, shambling gait which told my surgical eyes that he was suffering from a weak spine.
Presently he returned, and behind him came a tall, gaunt woman bearing in her arms a very beautiful child, dark-eyed, golden-haired, a wonderful mixture of the Saxon and the Latin.
"Fancy anyone having the heart to hurt him," he muttered, as he glanced down at the small, angry red pucker upon the cherub throat.
It was at this moment that I chanced to glance at Holmes, and saw a most singular intentness in his expression.
Following his gaze I could only guess that he was looking out through the window at the melancholy, dripping garden.
It is true that a shutter had half closed outside and obstructed the view, but none the less it was certainly at the window that Holmes was fixing his concentrated attention.
Then he smiled, and his eyes came back to the baby. On its chubby neck there was this small puckered mark.
Without speaking, Holmes examined it with care. Finally he shook one of the dimpled fists which waved in front of him.
Good-bye, little man. You have made a strange start in life. Nurse, I should wish to have a word with you in private.
He took her aside and spoke earnestly for a few minutes. I only heard the last words, which were: "Your anxiety will soon, I hope, be set at rest."
"Do you like her, Jack?" Holmes turned suddenly upon the boy. His expressive mobile face shadowed over, and he shook his head.
"Jacky has very strong likes and dislikes," said Ferguson, putting his arm round the boy. "Luckily I am one of his likes."
"It is certainly delicate," said my friend, with an amused smile, "but I have not been struck up to now with its complexity.
I had, in fact, reached it before we left Baker Street, and the rest has merely been observation and confirmation.
"For Heaven's sake, Holmes," he said hoarsely, "if you can see the truth in this matter, do not keep me in suspense.
How do I stand? What shall I do? I care nothing as to how you have found your facts so long as you have really got them.
Certainly I owe you an explanation, and you shall have it. But you will permit me to handle the matter in my own way?
I ascended again and handed the note to Dolores, who cautiously opened the door. A minute later I heard a cry from within, a cry in which joy and surprise seemed to be blended.
At my summons Ferguson and Holmes came up. As we entered the room Ferguson took a step or two towards his wife, who had raised herself in the bed, but she held out her hand to repulse him.
He sank into an arm-chair, while Holmes seated himself beside him, after bowing to the lady, who looked at him with wide-eyed amazement.
"I think we can dispense with Dolores," said Holmes. "Oh, very well, madame, if you would rather she stayed I can see no objection.
Now, Mr. Ferguson, I am a busy man with many calls, and my methods have to be short and direct. The swiftest surgery is the least painful.
Let me first say what will ease your mind. Your wife is a very good, a very loving, and a very ill-used woman.
Let me tell you, then, the train of reasoning which passed through my mind in Baker Street. The idea of a vampire was to me absurd.
Such things do not happen in criminal practice in England. And yet your observation was precise. You had seen the lady rise from beside the child's cot with the blood upon her lips.
Did it not occur to you that a bleeding wound may be sucked for some other purpose than to draw the blood from it?
Now do you understand? Your wife feared such an attack. She saw it made and saved the child's life, and yet she shrank from telling you all the truth, for she knew how you loved the boy and feared lest it break your heart.
I watched him as you fondled the child just now. His face was clearly reflected in the glass of the window where the shutter formed a background.
You have to face it, Mr. Ferguson. It is the more painful because it is a distorted love, a maniacal exaggerated love for you, and possibly for his dead mother, which has prompted his action.
His very soul is consumed with hatred for this splendid child, whose health and beauty are a contrast to his own weakness.
How could I tell you, Bob? I felt the blow it would be to you. It was better that I should wait and that it should come from some other lips than mine.
"I think a year at sea would be my prescription for Master Jacky," said Holmes, rising from his chair.
Only one thing is still clouded, madame. We can quite understand your attacks upon Master Jacky. There is a limit to a mother's patience.
"This, I fancy, is the time for our exit, Watson," said Holmes in a whisper. "If you will take one elbow of the too faithful Dolores, I will take the other.
There, now," he added, as he closed the door behind him, "I think we may leave them to settle the rest among themselves."
I have only one further note of this case. It is the letter which Holmes wrote in final answer to that with which the narrative begins.
It may have been a comedy, or it may have been a tragedy. It cost one man his reason, it cost me a blood-letting, and it cost yet another man the penalties of the law.
I remember the date very well, for it was in the same month that Holmes refused a knighthood for services which may perhaps some day be described.
I only refer to the matter in passing, for in my position of partner and confidant I am obliged to be particularly careful to avoid any indiscretion.
I repeat, however, that this enables me to fix the date, which was the latter end of June, 1902, shortly after the conclusion of the South African War.
Holmes had spent several days in bed, as was his habit from time to time, but he emerged that morning with a long foolscap document in his hand and a twinkle of amusement in his austere grey eyes.
"There is a chance for you to make some money, friend Watson," said he. "Have you ever heard the name of Garrideb?"
Ah, that's a long story--rather a whimsical one, too. I don't think in all our explorations of human complexities we have ever come upon anything more singular.
The fellow will be here presently for cross-examination, so I won't open the matter up till he comes.
The telephone directory lay on the table beside me, and I turned over the pages in a rather hopeless quest.
"'Garrideb, N.,'" he read, "'136 Little Ryder Street, W.' Sorry to disappoint you, my dear Watson, but this is the man himself.
"Why, here it is!" I cried in amazement. "This is a different initial. John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law, Moorville, Kansas, U.S.A."
Holmes smiled as he looked at the card. "I am afraid you must make yet another effort, Watson," said he.
This gentleman is also in the plot already, though I certainly did not expect to see him this morning.
A moment later he was in the room. Mr. John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law, was a short, powerful man with the round, fresh, clean-shaven face characteristic of so many American men of affairs.
The general effect was chubby and rather childlike, so that one received the impression of quite a young man with a broad set smile upon his face.
His eyes, however, were arresting. Seldom in any human head have I seen a pair which bespoke a more intense inward life, so bright were they, so alert, so responsive to every change of thought.
"Mr. Holmes?" he asked, glancing from one to the other. "Ah, yes! Your pictures are not unlike you, sir, if I may say so.
"Pray sit down," said Sherlock Holmes. "We shall, I fancy, have a good deal to discuss." He took up his sheets of foolscap.
You are, of course, the Mr. John Garrideb mentioned in this document. But surely you have been in England some time?
Mr. Garrideb forced a laugh. "I've read of your tricks, Mr. Holmes, but I never thought I would be the subject of them.
Well, well, I had no idea I was so obvious a Britisher. But business brought me over here some time ago, and so, as you say, my outfit is nearly all London.
However, I guess your time is of value, and we did not meet to talk about the cut of my socks. What about getting down to that paper you hold in your hand?
Holmes had in some way ruffled our visitor, whose chubby face had assumed a far less amiable expression.
"Patience! Patience, Mr. Garrideb!" said my friend in a soothing voice. "Dr. Watson would tell you that these little digressions of mine sometimes prove in the end to have some bearing on the matter.
"Why did he ever drag you into it at all?" asked our visitor, with a sudden outflame of anger. "What in thunder had you to do with it?
Here was a bit of professional business between two gentlemen, and one of them must needs call in a detective!
I saw him this morning, and he told me this fool-trick he had played me, and that's why I am here. But I feel bad about it, all the same.
There was no reflection upon you, Mr. Garrideb. It was simply zeal upon his part to gain your end--an end which is, I understand, equally vital for both of you.
He knew that I had means of getting information, and, therefore, it was very natural that he should apply to me.
"Well, that puts it different," said he. "When I went to see him this morning and he told me he had sent to a detective, I just asked for your address and came right away.
I don't want police butting into a private matter. But if you are content just to help us find the man, there can be no harm in that.
"Well, that is just how it stands," said Holmes. "And now, sir, since you are here, we had best have a clear account from your own lips.
It was so big a chance that I just let my legal practice slide and I set forth looking for Garridebs.
There is not one in the United States. I went through it, sir, with a fine-toothed comb and never a Garrideb could I catch.
Then I tried the old country. Sure enough there was the name in the London Telephone Directory. I went after him two days ago and explained the whole matter to him.
But he is a lone man, like myself, with some women relations, but no men. It says three adult men in the will.
So you see we still have a vacancy, and if you can help to fill it we will be very ready to pay your charges.
"Well, Watson," said Holmes, with a smile, "I said it was rather whimsical, did I not? I should have thought, sir, that your obvious way was to advertise in the agony columns of the papers."
Dear me! Well, it is certainly a most curious little problem. I may take a glance at it in my leisure.
By the way, it is curious that you should have come from Topeka. I used to have a correspondent--he is dead now--old Dr. Lysander Starr, who was Mayor in 1890.
"Good old Dr. Starr!" said our visitor. "His name is still honoured. Well, Mr. Holmes, I suppose all we can do is to report to you and let you know how we progress.
I was wondering, Watson, what on earth could be the object of this man in telling us such a rigmarole of lies.
I nearly asked him so--for there are times when a brutal frontal attack is the best policy--but I judged it better to let him think he had fooled us.
I never knew a Dr. Lysander Starr of Topeka. Touch him where you would he was false. I think the fellow is really an American, but he has worn his accent smooth with years of London.
Yes, yes, I am Mr. Nathan Garrideb. Is Mr. Holmes there? I should very much like to have a word with Mr. Holmes.
I understood from your note that you did not go out often.... Well, we shall be round about six. You need not mention it to the American lawyer....
The particular house to which we were directed was a large, old-fashioned, Early Georgian edifice with a flat brick face broken only by two deep bay windows on the ground floor.
It was on this ground floor that our client lived, and, indeed, the low windows proved to be the front of the huge room in which he spent his waking hours.
"Up some years, Watson," he remarked, indicating its discoloured surface. "It's his real name, anyhow, and that is something to note."
The house had a common stair, and there were a number of names painted in the hall some indicating offices and some private chambers.
Mr. Nathan Garrideb proved to be a very tall, loose-jointed, round-backed person, gaunt and bald, some sixty-odd years of age.
The room was as curious as its occupant. It looked like a small museum. It was both broad and deep, with cupboards and cabinets all round, crowded with specimens, geological and anatomical.
As I glanced round I was surprised at the universality of the man's interests. Here was a case of ancient coins.
There was a cabinet of flint instruments. Behind his central table was a large cupboard of fossil bones.
Above was a line of plaster skulls with such names as "Neanderthal," "Heidelberg," "Cromagnon" printed beneath them.
It was clear that he was a student of many subjects. As he stood in front of us now, he held a piece of chamois leather in his right hand with which he was polishing a coin.
"Syracusan--of the best period," he explained, holding it up. "They degenerated greatly towards the end.
At their best I hold them supreme, though some prefer the Alexandrian school. You will find a chair here, Mr. Holmes.
Pray allow me to clear these bones. And you, sir--ah, yes, Dr. Watson--if you would have the goodness to put the Japanese vase to one side.
You see round me my little interests in life. My doctor lectures me about never going out, but why should I go out when I have so much to hold me here?
I can assure you that the adequate cataloguing of one of those cabinets would take me three good months.
Now and again I drive down to Sotheby's or Christie's. Otherwise I very seldom leave my room. I am not too strong, and my researches are very absorbing.
But you can imagine, Mr. Holmes, what a terrific shock--pleasant but terrific--it was for me when I heard of this unparalleled good fortune.
It only needs one more Garrideb to complete the matter, and surely we can find one. I had a brother, but he is dead, and female relatives are disqualified.
But there must surely be others in the world. I had heard that you handled strange cases, and that was why I sent to you.
Of course, this American gentleman is quite right, and I should have taken his advice first, but I acted for the best.
"I think you acted very wisely indeed," said Holmes. "But are you really anxious to acquire an estate in America?"
Certainly not, sir. Nothing would induce me to leave my collection. But this gentleman has assured me that he will buy me out as soon as we have established our claim.
Just think what I could do with five million dollars. Why, I have the nucleus of a national collection.
His eyes gleamed behind his great spectacles. It was very clear that no pains would be spared by Mr. Nathan Garrideb in finding a namesake.
"I merely called to make your acquaintance, and there is no reason why I should interrupt your studies," said Holmes.
He seemed to think it was some reflection on his honour. But he was quite cheerful again when he returned.
Holmes's cross-examination was interrupted by an imperative knocking at the door. No sooner had our client unlatched it than the American lawyer burst excitedly into the room.
"Here you are!" he cried, waving a paper over his head. "I thought I should be in time to get you. Mr. Nathan Garrideb, my congratulations!
You are a rich man, sir. Our business is happily finished and all is well. As to you, Mr. Holmes, we can only say we are sorry if we have given you any useless trouble.
He handed over the paper to our client, who stood staring at a marked advertisement. Holmes and I leaned forward and read it over his shoulder.
"I had opened up inquiries in Birmingham," said the American, "and my agent there has sent me this advertisement from a local paper.
We must hustle and put the thing through. I have written to this man and told him that you will see him in his office to-morrow afternoon at four o'clock.
What do you say, Mr. Holmes? Don't you think it would be wiser? Here am I, a wandering American with a wonderful tale.
Why should he believe what I tell him? But you are a Britisher with solid references, and he is bound to take notice of what you say.
I would go with you if you wished, but I have a very busy day to-morrow, and I could always follow you if you are in any trouble.
It is nothing, Mr. Garrideb. I have figured out your connections. You leave at twelve and should be there soon after two.
Then you can be back the same night. All you have to do is to see this man, explain the matter, and get an affidavit of his existence.
By the Lord!" he added hotly, "considering I've come all the way from the centre of America, it is surely little enough if you go a hundred miles in order to put this matter through."
Mr. Nathan Garrideb shrugged his shoulders with a disconsolate air. "Well, if you insist I shall go," said he.
It is certainly hard for me to refuse you anything, considering the glory of hope that you have brought into my life.
"I'll see to that," said the American. "Well," he added, looking at his watch, "I'll have to get on. I'll call to-morrow, Mr. Nathan, and see you off to Birmingham.
I noticed that my friend's face cleared when the American left the room, and the look of thoughtful perplexity had vanished.
"I wish I could look over your collection, Mr. Garrideb," said he. "In my profession all sorts of odd knowledge comes useful, and this room of yours is a storehouse of it."
"I had always heard, sir, that you were a very intelligent man," said he. "I could take you round now, if you have the time."
Unfortunately, I have not. But these specimens are so well labelled and classified that they hardly need your personal explanation.
If I should be able to look in to-morrow, I presume that there would be no objection to my glancing over them?
None at all. You are most welcome. The place will, of course, be shut up, but Mrs. Saunders is in the basement up to four o'clock and would let you in with her key.
Well, I happen to be clear to-morrow afternoon. If you would say a word to Mrs. Saunders it would be quite in order.
Really. I should have thought a little earlier. However, it is easily ascertained. Well, good-bye, Mr. Garrideb, and may you have every success in your Birmingham journey.
The house-agent's was close by, but we found that it was closed for the day, so we made our way back to Baker Street.
"Our little problem draws to a close," said he. "No doubt you have outlined the solution in your own mind."
The head is surely clear enough and the tail we should see to-morrow. Did you notice nothing curious about that advertisement?
Oh, you did notice that, did you? Come, Watson, you improve all the time. Yes, it was bad English but good American.
The printer had set it up as received. Then the buckboards. That is American also. And artesian wells are commoner with them than with us.
It was a typical American advertisement, but purporting to be from an English firm. What do you make of that?
I can only suppose that this American lawyer put it in himself. What his object was I fail to understand.
Well, there are alternative explanations. Anyhow, he wanted to get this good old fossil up to Birmingham.
That is very clear. I might have told him that he was clearly going on a wild-goose chase, but, on second thoughts, it seemed better to clear the stage by letting him go.
"This is a more serious matter than I had expected, Watson," said he. "It is fair to tell you so, though I know it will only be an additional reason to you for running your head into danger.
Well, it is not the first we have shared, Holmes. I hope it may not be the last. What is the particular danger this time?
We are up against a very hard case. I have identified Mr. John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law. He is none other than 'Killer' Evans, of sinister and murderous reputation.
Ah, it is not part of your profession to carry about a portable Newgate Calendar in your memory. I have been down to see friend Lestrade at the Yard.
There may be an occasional want of imaginative intuition down there, but they lead the world for thoroughness and method.
I had an idea that we might get on the track of our American friend in their records. Sure enough, I found his chubby face smiling up at me from the Rogues' Portrait Gallery.
James Winter, alias Morecroft, alias Killer Evans, was the inscription below." Holmes drew an envelope from his pocket.
I scribbled down a few points from his dossier. Aged forty-four. Native of Chicago. Known to have shot three men in the States.
Escaped from penitentiary through political influence. Came to London in 1893. Shot a man over cards in a night club in the Waterloo Road in January, 1895.
Man died, but he was shown to have been the aggressor in the row. Dead man was identified as Rodger Prescott, famous as forger and coiner in Chicago.
Killer Evans released in 1901. Has been under police supervision since, but so far as known has led an honest life.
Very dangerous man, usually carries arms and is prepared to use them. That is our bird, Watson--a sporting bird, as you must admit.
Well, it begins to define itself. I have been to the house-agents. Our client, as he told us, has been there five years.
It was unlet for a year before then. The previous tenant was a gentleman at large named Waldron. Waldron's appearance was well remembered at the office.
He had suddenly vanished and nothing more been heard of him. He was a tall, bearded man with very dark features.
Now, Prescott, the man whom Killer Evans had shot, was, according to Scotland Yard, a tall, dark man with a beard.
As a working hypothesis, I think we may take it that Prescott, the American criminal, used to live in the very room which our innocent friend now devotes to his museum.
I have my old favourite with me. If our Wild West friend tries to live up to his nickname, we must be ready for him.
I'll give you an hour for a siesta, Watson, and then I think it will be time for our Ryder Street adventure.
Shortly afterwards the outer door closed, her bonnet passed the bow window, and we knew that we were alone in the lower floor of the house.
Holmes made a rapid examination of the premises. There was one cupboard in a dark corner which stood out a little from the wall.
He wanted to get our amiable friend out of his room--that is very clear, and, as the collector never went out, it took some planning to do it.
Well, that is what we are here to find out. It has nothing whatever to do with our client, so far as I can read the situation.
It is something connected with the man he murdered--the man who may have been his confederate in crime.
But the fact that Rodger Prescott of evil memory inhabited these rooms points to some deeper reason. Well, Watson, we can but possess our souls in patience and see what the hour may bring.
That hour was not long in striking. We crouched closer in the shadow as we heard the outer door open and shut.
Presently we heard the sound of sliding boards, and an instant later a square had opened in the planks.
Clearly our moment had come. Holmes touched my wrist as a signal, and together we stole across to the open trapdoor.
Gently as we moved, however, the old floor must have creaked under our feet, for the head of our American, peering anxiously round, emerged suddenly from the open space.
His face turned upon us with a glare of baffled rage, which gradually softened into a rather shamefaced grin as he realized that two pistols were pointed at his head.
"Well, well!" said he, coolly, as he scrambled to the surface. "I guess you have been one too many for me, Mr. Holmes.
Saw through my game, I suppose, and played me for a sucker from the first. Well, sir, I hand it to you; you have me beat and----
In an instant he had whisked out a revolver from his breast and had fired two shots. I felt a sudden hot sear as if a red-hot iron had been pressed to my thigh.
There was a crash as Holmes's pistol came down on the man's head. I had a vision of him sprawling upon the floor with blood running down his face while Holmes rummaged him for weapons.
It was worth a wound--it was worth many wounds--to know the depth of loyalty and love which lay behind that cold mask.
The clear, hard eyes were dimmed for a moment, and the firm lips were shaking. For the one and only time I caught a glimpse of a great heart as well as of a great brain.
"You are right," he cried, with an immense sigh of relief. "It is quite superficial." His face set like flint as he glared at our prisoner, who was sitting up with a dazed face.
By the Lord, it is as well for you. If you had killed Watson, you would not have got out of this room alive.
He had nothing to say for himself. He only lay and scowled. I leaned on Holmes's arm, and together we looked down into the small cellar which had been disclosed by the secret flap.
It was still illuminated by the candle which Evans had taken down with him. Our eyes fell upon a mass of rusted machinery, great rolls of paper, a litter of bottles, and, neatly arranged upon a small table, a number of neat little bundles.
"Yes, sir," said our prisoner, staggering slowly to his feet and then sinking into the chair. "The greatest counterfeiter London ever saw.
That's Prescott's machine, and those bundles on the table are two thousand of Prescott's notes worth a hundred each and fit to pass anywhere.
We don't do things like that, Mr. Evans. There is no bolt-hole for you in this country. You shot this man Prescott, did you not?
Yes, sir, and got five years for it, though it was he who pulled on me. Five years--when I should have had a medal the size of a soup plate.
No living man could tell a Prescott from a Bank of England, and if I hadn't put him out he would have flooded London with them.
I was the only one in the world who knew where he made them. Can you wonder that I wanted to get to the place?
And can you wonder that when I found this crazy boob of a bug-hunter with the queer name squatting right on the top of it, and never quitting his room, I had to do the best I could to shift him?
Maybe I would have been wiser if I had put him away. It would have been easy enough, but I'm a soft-hearted guy that can't begin shooting unless the other man has a gun also.
But say, Mr. Holmes, what have I done wrong, anyhow? I've not used this plant. I've not hurt this old stiff.
"Only attempted murder, so far as I can see," said Holmes. "But that's not our job. They take that at the next stage.
What we wanted at present was just your sweet self. Please give the Yard a call, Watson. It won't be entirely unexpected.
So those were the facts about Killer Evans and his remarkable invention of the three Garridebs. We heard later that our poor old friend never got over the shock of his dissipated dreams.
When his castle in the air fell down, it buried him beneath the ruins. He was last heard of at a nursing-home in Brixton.
It was a glad day at the Yard when the Prescott outfit was discovered, for, though they knew that it existed, they had never been able, after the death of the man, to find out where it was.
Evans had indeed done great service and caused several worthy C.I.D. men to sleep the sounder, for the counterfeiter stands in a class by himself as a public danger.
They would willingly have subscribed to that soup-plate medal of which the criminal had spoken, but an unappreciative Bench took a less favourable view, and the Killer returned to those shades from which he had just emerged.
Somewhere in the vaults of the bank of Cox and Co., at Charing Cross, there is a travel-worn and battered tin dispatch-box with my name, John H. Watson, M.D., Late Indian Army, painted upon the lid.
It is crammed with papers, nearly all of which are records of cases to illustrate the curious problems which Mr. Sherlock Holmes had at various times to examine.
Some, and not the least interesting, were complete failures, and as such will hardly bear narrating, since no final explanation is forthcoming.
A problem without a solution may interest the student, but can hardly fail to annoy the casual reader.
Among these unfinished tales is that of Mr. James Phillimore, who, stepping back into his own house to get his umbrella, was never more seen in this world.
I need not say that such a breach of confidence is unthinkable, and that these records will be separated and destroyed now that my friend has time to turn his energies to the matter.
In some I was myself concerned and can speak as an eye-witness, while in others I was either not present or played so small a part that they could only be told as by a third person.
It was a wild morning in October, and I observed as I was dressing how the last remaining leaves were being whirled from the solitary plane tree which graces the yard behind our house.
I descended to breakfast prepared to find my companion in depressed spirits, for, like all great artists, he was easily impressed by his surroundings.
On the contrary, I found that he had nearly finished his meal, and that his mood was particularly bright and joyous, with that somewhat sinister cheerfulness which was characteristic of his lighter moments.
"The faculty of deduction is certainly contagious, Watson," he answered. "It has enabled you to probe my secret.
There is little to share, but we may discuss it when you have consumed the two hard-boiled eggs with which our new cook has favoured us.
Their condition may not be unconnected with the copy of the _Family Herald_ which I observed yesterday upon the hall-table.
Even so trivial a matter as cooking an egg demands an attention which is conscious of the passage of time, and incompatible with the love romance in that excellent periodical.
A quarter of an hour later the table had been cleared and we were face to face. He had drawn a letter from his pocket.
Well, he was once Senator for some Western State, but is better known as the greatest gold-mining magnate in the world.
Yes; he bought a considerable estate in Hampshire some five years ago. Possibly you have already heard of the tragic end of his wife?
Of course. I remember it now. That is why the name is familiar. But I really know nothing of the details.
Holmes waved his hand towards some papers on a chair. "I had no idea that the case was coming my way or I should have had my extracts ready," said he.
The fact is that the problem, though exceedingly sensational, appeared to present no difficulty. The interesting personality of the accused does not obscure the clearness of the evidence.
That was the view taken by the coroner's jury and also in the police-court proceedings. It is now referred to the Assizes at Winchester.
I fear it is a thankless business. I can discover facts, Watson, but I cannot change them. Unless some entirely new and unexpected ones come to light I do not see what my client can hope for.
Ah, I forgot I had not told you. I am getting into your involved habit, Watson, of telling a story backwards.
I can't see the best woman God ever made go to her death without doing all that is possible to save her.
I can't explain things--I can't even try to explain them, but I know beyond all doubt that Miss Dunbar is innocent.
You know the facts--who doesn't? It has been the gossip of the country. And never a voice raised for her!
It's the damned injustice of it all that makes me crazy. That woman has a heart that wouldn't let her kill a fly.
Well, I'll come at eleven to-morrow and see if you can get some ray of light in the dark. Maybe I have a clue and don't know it.
Anyhow, all I know and all I have and all I am are for your use if only you can save her. If ever in your life you showed your powers, put them now into this case.
"There you have it," said Sherlock Holmes, knocking out the ashes of his after-breakfast pipe and slowly refilling it.
That is the gentleman I await. As to the story, you have hardly time to master all these papers, so I must give it to you in a nutshell if you are to take an intelligent interest in the proceedings.
This man is the greatest financial power in the world, and a man, as I understand, of most violent and formidable character.
These are the three people concerned, and the scene is a grand old manor-house, the centre of an historical English estate.
No weapon was found near her and there was no local clue as to the murder. No weapon near her, Watson--mark that!
Well, in the first place there is some very direct evidence. A revolver with one discharged chamber and a calibre which corresponded with the bullet was found on the floor of her wardrobe.
Suddenly with a start he emerged into brisk life once more. "Yes, Watson, it was found. Pretty damning, eh?
So the two juries thought. Then the dead woman had a note upon her making an appointment at that very place and signed by the governess.
Nor could she prove an alibi. On the contrary, she had to admit that she was down near Thor Bridge--that was the scene of the tragedy--about that hour.
And yet, Watson--and yet! This bridge--a single broad span of stone with balustraded sides--carries the drive over the narrowest part of a long, deep, reed-girt sheet of water.
Thor Mere it is called. In the mouth of the bridge lay the dead woman. Such are the main facts. But here, if I mistake not, is our client, considerably before his time.
Billy had opened the door, but the name which he announced was an unexpected one. Mr. Marlow Bates was a stranger to both of us.
He was a thin, nervous wisp of a man with frightened eyes, and a twitching, hesitating manner--a man whom my own professional eye would judge to be on the brink of an absolute nervous breakdown.
"You seem agitated, Mr. Bates," said Holmes. "Pray sit down. I fear I can only give you a short time, for I have an appointment at eleven."
"I know you have," our visitor gasped, shooting out short sentences like a man who is out of breath. "Mr. Gibson is coming.
Mr. Gibson is my employer. I am manager of his estate. Mr. Holmes, he is a villain--an infernal villain.
I have to be emphatic, Mr. Holmes, for the time is so limited. I would not have him find me here for the world.
He is almost due now. But I was so situated that I could not come earlier. His secretary, Mr. Ferguson, only told me this morning of his appointment with you.
I have given him notice. In a couple of weeks I shall have shaken off his accursed slavery. A hard man, Mr. Holmes, hard to all about him.
Those public charities are a screen to cover his private iniquities. But his wife was his chief victim.
He was brutal to her--yes, sir, brutal! How she came by her death I do not know, but I am sure that he had made her life a misery to her.
We all liked her and felt for her and hated him for the way that he treated her. But he is plausible and cunning.
That is all I have to say to you. Don't take him at his face value. There is more behind. Now I'll go.
"Well! Well!" said Holmes, after an interval of silence. "Mr. Gibson seems to have a nice loyal household.
Sharp at the hour we heard a heavy step upon the stairs and the famous millionaire was shown into the room.
As I looked upon him I understood not only the fears and dislike of his manager, but also the execrations which so many business rivals have heaped upon his head.
If I were a sculptor and desired to idealize the successful man of affairs, iron of nerve and leathery of conscience, I should choose Mr. Neil Gibson as my model.
His tall, gaunt craggy figure had a suggestion of hunger and rapacity. An Abraham Lincoln keyed to base uses instead of high ones would give some idea of the man.
His face might have been chiselled in granite, hard-set, craggy, remorseless, with deep lines upon it, the scars of many a crisis.
Cold grey eyes, looking shrewdly out from under bristling brows, surveyed us each in turn. He bowed in perfunctory fashion as Holmes mentioned my name, and then with a masterful air of possession he drew a chair up to my companion and seated himself with his bony knees almost touching him.
"Let me say right here, Mr. Holmes," he began, "that money is nothing to me in this case. You can burn it if it's any use in lighting you to the truth.
This woman is innocent and this woman has to be cleared, and it's up to you to do it. Name your figure!
"My professional charges are upon a fixed scale," said Holmes coldly. "I do not vary them, save when I remit them altogether."
Well, if dollars make no difference to you, think of the reputation. If you pull this off every paper in England and America will be booming you.
Thank you, Mr. Gibson, I do not think that I am in need of booming. It may surprise you to know that I prefer to work anonymously, and that it is the problem itself which attracts me.
I think that you will find all the main ones in the Press reports. I don't know that I can add anything which will help you.
The Gold King gave a violent start, and half rose from his chair. Then his massive calm came back to him.
I suppose you are within your rights--and maybe doing your duty--in asking such a question, Mr. Holmes.
Then I can assure you that our relations were entirely and always those of an employer towards a young lady whom he never conversed with, or ever saw, save when she was in the company of his children.
"I am a rather busy man, Mr. Gibson," said he, "and I have no time or taste for aimless conversations.
Our visitor had risen also and his great loose figure towered above Holmes. There was an angry gleam from under those bristling brows and a tinge of colour in the sallow cheeks.
Plain enough, but what's at the back of it? Raising the price on me, or afraid to tackle it, or what?
"Well, perhaps you have," said Holmes. "I'll give you one. This case is quite sufficiently complicated to start with, without the further difficulty of false information."
Well, I was trying to express it as delicately as I could, but if you insist upon the word I will not contradict you.
I sprang to my feet, for the expression upon the millionaire's face was fiendish in its intensity, and he had raised his great knotted fist.
Don't be noisy, Mr. Gibson. I find that after breakfast even the smallest argument is unsettling. I suggest that a stroll in the morning air and a little quiet thought will be greatly to your advantage.
With an effort the Gold King mastered his fury. I could not but admire him, for by a supreme self-command he had turned in a minute from a hot flame of anger to a frigid and contemptuous indifference.
Well, it's your choice. I guess you know how to run your own business. I can't make you touch the case against your will.
You've done yourself no good this morning, Mr. Holmes, for I have broken stronger men than you. No man ever crossed me and was the better for it.
"So many have said so, and yet here I am," said Holmes, smiling. "Well, good morning, Mr. Gibson. You have a good deal yet to learn."
Our visitor made a noisy exit, but Holmes smoked in imperturbable silence with dreamy eyes fixed upon the ceiling.
Well, Holmes, I must confess that when I consider that this is a man who would certainly brush any obstacle from his path, and when I remember that his wife may have been an obstacle and an object of dislike, as that man Bates plainly told us, it seems to me----
He is sure to come back. He must come back. He can't leave it where it is. Ha! isn't that a ring? Yes, there is his footstep.
The Gold King had re-entered the room in a more chastened mood than he had left it. His wounded pride still showed in his resentful eyes, but his common sense had shown him that he must yield if he would attain his end.
I've been thinking it over, Mr. Holmes, and I feel that I have been hasty in taking your remarks amiss.
You are justified in getting down to the facts, whatever they may be, and I think the more of you for it.
I can assure you, however, that the relations between Miss Dunbar and me don't really touch this case.
Yes, I guess that is so. You're like a surgeon who wants every symptom before he can give his diagnosis.
Exactly. That expresses it. And it is only a patient who has an object in deceiving his surgeon who would conceal the facts of his case.
I guess most men have a little private reserve of their own in some corner of their souls where they don't welcome intruders.
And you burst suddenly into it. But the object excuses you, since it was to try and save her. Well, the stakes are down and the reserve open and you can explore where you will.
The Gold King paused for a moment as one who marshals his thoughts. His grim, deep-lined face had become even sadder and more grave.
Then came Miss Grace Dunbar. She answered our advertisement and became governess to our two children.
Perhaps you have seen her portrait in the papers. The whole world has proclaimed that she also is a very beautiful woman.
I do not blame you for feeling it. I should blame you if you expressed it, since this young lady was in a sense under your protection.
"Well, maybe so," said the millionaire, though for a moment the reproof had brought the old angry gleam into his eyes.
I said to her that if I could marry her I would, but that it was out of my power. I said that money was no object and that all I could do to make her happy and comfortable would be done.
See here, Mr. Holmes. I came to you on a question of evidence, not on a question of morals. I'm not asking for your criticism.
Some of you rich men have to be taught that all the world cannot be bribed into condoning your offences.
That's how I feel myself about it now. I thank God that my plans did not work out as I intended. She would have none of it, and she wanted to leave the house instantly.
Well, in the first place, others were dependent upon her, and it was no light matter for her to let them all down by sacrificing her living.
When I had sworn--as I did--that she should never be molested again, she consented to remain. But there was another reason.
She knew the influence she had over me, and that it was stronger than any other influence in the world.
Well, she knew something of my affairs. They are large, Mr. Holmes--large beyond the belief of an ordinary man.
I can make or break--and it is usually break. It wasn't individuals only. It was communities, cities, even nations.
Business is a hard game, and the weak go to the wall. I played the game for all it was worth. I never squealed myself and I never cared if the other fellow squealed.
That was how she saw it, and I guess she could see past the dollars to something that was more lasting.
She found that I listened to what she said, and she believed she was serving the world by influencing my actions.
It's very black against her. I can't deny that. And women lead an inward life and may do things beyond the judgment of a man.
At first I was so rattled and taken aback that I was ready to think she had been led away in some extraordinary fashion that was clean against her usual nature.
One explanation came into my head. I give it to you, Mr. Holmes, for what it is worth. There is no doubt that my wife was bitterly jealous.
It was an influence for good, but that did not mend the matter. She was crazy with hatred, and the heat of the Amazon was always in her blood.
She might have planned to murder Miss Dunbar--or we will say to threaten her with a gun and so frighten her into leaving us.
"That possibility had already occurred to me," said Holmes. "Indeed, it is the only obvious alternative to deliberate murder."
Well, that is not final--is it? One can understand that a woman placed in so awful a position might hurry home still in her bewilderment holding the revolver.
She might even throw it down among her clothes, hardly knowing what she was doing, and when it was found she might try to lie her way out by a total denial, since all explanation was impossible.
Holmes looked at his watch. "I have no doubt we can get the necessary permits this morning and reach Winchester by the evening train.
When I have seen this young lady, it is very possible that I may be of more use to you in the matter, though I cannot promise that my conclusions will necessarily be such as you desire.
There was some delay in the official pass, and instead of reaching Winchester that day we went down to Thor Place, the Hampshire estate of Mr. Neil Gibson.
He did not accompany us himself, but we had the address of Sergeant Coventry, of the local police, who had first examined into the affair.
He was a tall, thin, cadaverous man, with a secretive and mysterious manner, which conveyed the idea that he knew or suspected a very great deal more than he dared say.
He had a trick, too, of suddenly sinking his voice to a whisper as if he had come upon something of vital importance, though the information was usually commonplace enough.
Behind these tricks of manner he soon showed himself to be a decent, honest fellow who was not too proud to admit that he was out of his depth and would welcome any help.
"Anyhow, I'd rather have you than Scotland Yard, Mr. Holmes," said he. "If the Yard gets called into a case, then the local loses all credit for success and may be blamed for failure.
"I need not appear in the matter at all," said Holmes, to the evident relief of our melancholy acquaintance.
Well, it's very handsome of you, I am sure. And your friend, Dr. Watson, can be trusted, I know. Now, Mr. Holmes, as we walk down to the place there is one question I should like to ask you.
I'd breathe it to no soul but you." He looked round as though he hardly dare utter the words. "Don't you think there might be a case against Mr. Neil Gibson himself?"
You've not seen Miss Dunbar. She is a wonderful fine woman in every way. He may well have wished his wife out of the road.
Well, the gentleman has a lot of fire-arms of one sort and another. We never quite matched that particular pistol--but the box was made for two.
This conversation had taken place in the little front room of Sergeant Coventry's humble cottage which served as the local police-station.
A walk of half a mile or so across a wind-swept heath, all gold and bronze with the fading ferns, brought us to a side-gate opening into the grounds of the Thor Place estate.
A path led us through the pheasant preserves, and then from a clearing we saw the wide-spread, half-timbered house, half Tudor and half Georgian, upon the crest of the hill.
Beside us there was a long, reedy pool, constricted in the centre where the main carriage drive passed over a stone bridge, but swelling into small lakes on either side.
Mr. Gibson himself. The moment the alarm was given and he had rushed down with others from the house, he insisted that nothing should be moved until the police should arrive.
On the back, sir. No trace of a struggle. No marks. No weapon. The short note from Miss Dunbar was clutched in her left hand.
That is of great importance. It excludes the idea that anyone could have placed the note there after death in order to furnish a false clue.
Dear me! The note, as I remember, was quite short. 'I will be at Thor Bridge at nine o'clock.--G. Dunbar.'
"Well, sir," said the guide, "it seemed, if I may be so bold as to say so, the only really clear point in the whole case."
Granting that the letter is genuine and was really written, it was certainly received some time before--say one hour or two.
Why, then, was this lady still clasping it in her left hand? Why should she carry it so carefully? She did not need to refer to it in the interview.
Suddenly he sprang up again and ran across to the opposite parapet, whipped his lens from his pocket, and began to examine the stonework.
The stonework was grey, but at this one point it showed white for a space not larger than a sixpence.
"It took some violence to do that," said Holmes thoughtfully. With his cane he struck the ledge several times without leaving a mark.
Yes, it was a hard knock. In a curious place, too. It was not from above but from below, for you see that it is on the lower edge of the parapet.
Yes, it is fifteen feet from the body. It may have nothing to do with the matter, but it is a point worth noting.
Then we can go. We will go up to the house first and look over these weapons of which you speak. Then we shall get on to Winchester, for I should desire to see Miss Dunbar before we go farther.
Mr. Neil Gibson had not returned from town, but we saw in the house the neurotic Mr. Bates who had called upon us in the morning.
He showed us with a sinister relish the formidable array of fire-arms of various shapes and sizes which his employer had accumulated in the course of an adventurous life.
"Mr. Gibson has his enemies, as anyone would expect who knew him and his methods," said he. "He sleeps with a loaded revolver in the drawer beside his bed.
He is a man of violence, sir, and there are times when all of us are afraid of him. I am sure that the poor lady who has passed was often terrified.
No, I cannot say that. But I have heard words which were nearly as bad--words of cold, cutting contempt, even before the servants.
"Our millionaire does not seem to shine in private life," remarked Holmes, as we made our way to the station.
Well, Watson, we have come on a good many facts, some of them new ones, and yet I seem some way from my conclusion.
In spite of the very evident dislike which Mr. Bates has to his employer, I gather from him that when the alarm came he was undoubtedly in his library.
Dinner was over at eight-thirty and all was normal up to then. It is true that the alarm was somewhat late in the evening, but the tragedy certainly occurred about the hour named in the note.
There is no evidence at all that Mr. Gibson had been out of doors since his return from town at five o'clock.
On the other hand, Miss Dunbar, as I understand it, admits that she had made an appointment to meet Mrs. Gibson at the bridge.
I must confess that the case would seem to me to be very black against her if it were not for one thing.
Not so, Watson. It had struck me even at my first perfunctory reading as very strange, and now that I am in closer touch with the case it is my only firm ground for hope.
Well now, Watson, suppose for a moment that we visualize you in the character of a woman who, in a cold, premeditated fashion, is about to get rid of a rival.
You have planned it. A note has been written. The victim has come. You have your weapon. The crime is done.
Your best friends would hardly call you a schemer, Watson, and yet I could not picture you doing anything so crude as that.
No, no, Watson, I will not admit that it is possible. Where a crime is coolly premeditated, then the means of covering it are coolly premeditated also.
Well, we shall set about explaining it. When once your point of view is changed, the very thing which was so damning becomes a clue to the truth.
For example, there is this revolver. Miss Dunbar disclaims all knowledge of it. On our new theory she is speaking truth when she says so.
Therefore, it was placed in her wardrobe. Who placed it there? Someone who wished to incriminate her.
Was not that person the actual criminal? You see how we come at once upon a most fruitful line of inquiry.
I had expected from all that we had heard to see a beautiful woman, but I can never forget the effect which Miss Dunbar produced upon me.
It was no wonder that even the masterful millionaire had found in her something more powerful than himself--something which could control and guide him.
Now, as she realized the presence and the help of my famous friend, there came a touch of colour in her wan cheeks and a light of hope began to glimmer in the glance which she turned upon us.
"Perhaps Mr. Neil Gibson has told you something of what occurred between us?" she asked, in a low, agitated voice.
It would be a cruel deception to pretend that you are not in very great danger. Give me all the help you can, then, to get at the truth.
I can see now that I was wrong. Nothing could justify me in remaining where I was a cause of unhappiness, and yet it is certain that the unhappiness would have remained even if I had left the house.
I can tell you the truth so far as I know it, Mr. Holmes, but I am in a position to prove nothing, and there are points--the most vital points--which I can neither explain nor can I imagine any explanation.
With regard, then, to my presence at Thor Bridge that night, I received a note from Mrs. Gibson in the morning.
I saw no reason for such secrecy, but I did as she asked, accepting the appointment. She asked me to destroy her note and I burned it in the schoolroom grate.
She was very much afraid of her husband, who treated her with a harshness for which I frequently reproached him, and I could only imagine that she acted in this way because she did not wish him to know of our interview.
I went down as I had promised. When I reached the bridge she was waiting for me. Never did I realize till that moment how this poor creature hated me.
She was like a mad woman--indeed, I think she was a mad woman, subtly mad with the deep power of deception which insane people may have.
How else could she have met me with unconcern every day and yet had so raging a hatred of me in her heart?
I will not say what she said. She poured her whole wild fury out in burning and horrible words. I did not even answer--I could not.
It was dreadful to see her. I put my hands to my ears and rushed away. When I left her she was standing still shrieking out her curses at me, in the mouth of the bridge.
No, I heard nothing. But, indeed, Mr. Holmes, I was so agitated and horrified by this terrible outbreak that I rushed to get back to the peace of my own room, and I was incapable of noticing anything which happened.
Mr. Gibson is a very strong, self-contained man. I do not think that he would ever show his emotions on the surface.
Then we come to the all-important point. This pistol that was found in your room. Had you ever seen it before?
That is final. Then someone came into your room and placed the pistol there in order to inculpate you.
It could only have been at meal-time, or else at the hours when I would be in the schoolroom with the children.
There was some sign of violence on the stonework of the bridge--a perfectly fresh chip just opposite the body.
Curious, Miss Dunbar, very curious. Why should it appear at the very time of the tragedy and why at the very place?
Holmes did not answer. His pale, eager face had suddenly assumed that tense, far-away expression which I had learned to associate with the supreme manifestations of his genius.
So evident was the crisis in his mind that none of us dared to speak, and we sat, barrister, prisoner, and myself, watching him in a concentrated and absorbed silence.
Never mind, my dear lady. You will hear from me, Mr. Cummings. With the help of the God of justice I will give you a case which will make England ring.
You will get news by to-morrow, Miss Dunbar, and meanwhile take my assurance that the clouds are lifting and that I have every hope that the light of truth is breaking through.
Suddenly, however, as we neared our destination he seated himself opposite to me--we had a first-class carriage to ourselves--and laying a hand upon each of my knees he looked into my eyes with the peculiarly mischievous gaze which was characteristic of his more imp-like moods.
It was as well for him that I did so, for he took little care for his own safety when his mind was once absorbed by a problem, so that more than once my revolver had been a good friend in need.
I produced it from my hip-pocket, a short, handy, but very serviceable little weapon. He undid the catch, shook out the cartridges, and examined it with care.
"Do you know, Watson," said he, "I believe your revolver is going to have a very intimate connection with the mystery which we are investigating."
No, Watson, I am very serious. There is a test before us. If the test comes off, all will be clear. And the test will depend upon the conduct of this little weapon.
One cartridge out. Now we will replace the other five and put on the safety-catch. So! That increases the weight and makes it a better reproduction.
I had no glimmer of what was in his mind nor did he enlighten me, but sat lost in thought until we pulled up in the little Hampshire station.
We secured a ramshackle trap, and in a quarter of an hour were at the house of our confidential friend, the sergeant.
"It all depends upon the behaviour of Dr. Watson's revolver," said my friend. "Here it is. Now, officer, can you give me ten yards of string?"
"I think that this is all we will need," said Holmes. "Now, if you please, we will get off on what I hope is the last stage of our journey."
As we approached the scene of the crime I could see that my friend under all his habitual coolness was in truth deeply agitated.
"Yes," he said, in answer to my remark, "you have seen me miss my mark before, Watson. I have an instinct for such things, and yet it has sometimes played me false.
As he walked he had firmly tied one end of the string to the handle of the revolver. We had now reached the scene of the tragedy.
With great care he marked out under the guidance of the policeman the exact spot where the body had been stretched.
He then stood on the fatal spot, some distance from the edge of the bridge, with my revolver in his hand, the string being taut between the weapon and the heavy stone on the farther side.
It had hardly gone before Holmes was kneeling beside the stonework, and a joyous cry showed that he had found what he expected.
"Was there ever a more exact demonstration?" he cried. "See, Watson, your revolver has solved the problem!"
As he spoke he pointed to a second chip of the exact size and shape of the first which had appeared on the under edge of the stone balustrade.
"We'll stay at the inn to-night," he continued, as he rose and faced the astonished sergeant. "You will, of course, get a grappling-hook and you will easily restore my friend's revolver.
You will also find beside it the revolver, string and weight with which this vindictive woman attempted to disguise her own crime and to fasten a charge of murder upon an innocent victim.
You can let Mr. Gibson know that I will see him in the morning, when steps can be taken for Miss Dunbar's vindication.
Late that evening, as we sat together smoking our pipes in the village inn, Holmes gave me a brief review of what had passed.
Then she took one of her husband's revolvers--there was, as you saw, an arsenal in the house--and kept it for her own use.
A similar one she concealed that morning in Miss Dunbar's wardrobe after discharging one barrel, which she could easily do in the woods without attracting attention.
She then went down to the bridge where she had contrived this exceedingly ingenious method for getting rid of her weapon.
When Miss Dunbar appeared she used her last breath in pouring out her hatred, and then, when she was out of hearing, carried out her terrible purpose.
Well, Watson, we have helped a remarkable woman, and also a formidable man. Should they in the future join their forces, as seems not unlikely, the financial world may find that Mr. Neil Gibson has learned something in that schoolroom of Sorrow where our earthly lessons are taught.
There were, however, certain obstacles in the way, and the true history of this curious case remained entombed in the tin box which contains so many records of my friend's adventures.
Now we have at last obtained permission to ventilate the facts which formed one of the very last cases handled by Holmes before his retirement from practice.
Even now a certain reticence and discretion have to be observed in laying the matter before the public.
It was one Sunday evening early in September of the year 1903 that I received one of Holmes's laconic messages: "Come at once if convenient--if inconvenient come all the same.--S.H."
The relations between us in those latter days were peculiar. He was a man of habits, narrow and concentrated habits, and I had become one of them.
As an institution I was like the violin, the shag tobacco, the old black pipe, the index books, and others perhaps less excusable.
When it was a case of active work and a comrade was needed upon whose nerve he could place some reliance, my role was obvious.
But apart from this I had uses. I was a whetstone for his mind. I stimulated him. He liked to think aloud in my presence.
If I irritated him by a certain methodical slowness in my mentality, that irritation served only to make his own flame-like intuitions and impressions flash up the more vividly and swiftly.
When I arrived at Baker Street I found him huddled up in his arm-chair with updrawn knees, his pipe in his mouth and his brow furrowed with thought.
Then with a start he seemed to come from his reverie, and, with his usual whimsical smile, he greeted me back to what had once been my home.
I have serious thoughts of writing a small monograph upon the uses of dogs in the work of the detective.
No, no, Watson; that side of the matter is, of course, obvious. But there is another which is far more subtle.
You may recollect that in the case which you, in your sensational way, coupled with the Copper Beeches, I was able, by watching the mind of the child, to form a deduction as to the criminal habits of the very smug and respectable father.
My line of thoughts about dogs is analogous. A dog reflects the family life. Whoever saw a frisky dog in a gloomy family, or a sad dog in a happy one?
Snarling people have snarling dogs, dangerous people have dangerous ones. And their passing moods may reflect the passing moods of others.
The practical application of what I have said is very close to the problem which I am investigating. It is a tangled skein, you understand, and I am looking for a loose end.
One possible loose end lies in the question: Why does Professor Presbury's faithful wolf-hound, Roy, endeavour to bite him?
I sank back in my chair in some disappointment. Was it for so trivial a question as this that I had been summoned from my work?
"The same old Watson!" said he. "You never learn that the gravest issues may depend upon the smallest things.
Well, that has to be considered. But he attacks no one else, nor does he apparently molest his master, save on very special occasions.
Curious, Watson--very curious. But young Mr. Bennett is before his time, if that is his ring. I had hoped to have a longer chat with you before he came.
There was a quick step on the stairs, a sharp tap at the door, and a moment later the new client presented himself.
"This matter is very delicate, Mr. Holmes," he said. "Consider the relation in which I stand to Professor Presbury, both privately and publicly.
Have no fear, Mr. Bennett. Dr. Watson is the very soul of discretion, and I can assure you that this is a matter in which I am very likely to need an assistant.
You will appreciate it, Watson, when I tell you that this gentleman, Mr. Trevor Bennett, is professional assistant to the great scientist, lives under his roof, and is engaged to his only daughter.
Certainly we must agree that the Professor has every claim upon his loyalty and devotion. But it may best be shown by taking the necessary steps to clear up this strange mystery.
Then the current of his life was broken. He is sixty-one years of age, but he became engaged to the daughter of Professor Morphy, his colleague in the chair of Comparative Anatomy.
It was not, as I understand, the reasoned courting of an elderly man, but rather the passionate frenzy of youth, for no one could have shown himself a more devoted lover.
The lady, Alice Morphy, was a very perfect girl both in mind and body, so that there was every excuse for the Professor's infatuation.
Now comes the point. From that time onwards a curious change came over the Professor. He became furtive and sly.
Those around him had always the feeling that he was not the man that they had known, but that he was under some shadow which had darkened his higher qualities.
His intellect was not affected. His lectures were as brilliant as ever. But always there was something new, something sinister and unexpected.
His daughter, who was devoted to him, tried again and again to resume the old relations and to penetrate this mask which her father seemed to have put on.
You, sir, as I understand, did the same--but all was in vain. And now, Mr. Bennett, tell in your own words the incident of the letters.
You must understand, Dr. Watson, that the Professor had no secrets from me. If I were his son or his younger brother, I could not have more completely enjoyed his confidence.
As his secretary I handled every paper which came to him, and I opened and subdivided his letters. Shortly after his return all this was changed.
He told me that certain letters might come to him from London which would be marked by a cross under the stamp.
These were to be set aside for his own eyes only. I may say that several of these did pass through my hands, that they had the E.C.
This he placed in his instrument cupboard. One day, in looking for a cannula, I took up the box. To my surprise he was very angry, and reproved me in words which were quite savage for my curiosity.
"You are certainly an admirable witness," said Holmes. "I may need some of these dates which you have noted."
I learned method among other things from my great teacher. From the time that I observed abnormality in his behaviour I felt that it was my duty to study his case.
Thus I have it here that it was on that very day, July 2, that Roy attacked the Professor, as he came from his study into the hall.
Again on July 11, there was a scene of the same sort and then I have a note of yet another upon July 20.
After that we had to banish Roy to the stables. He was a dear, affectionate animal--but I fear I weary you.
Mr. Bennett spoke in a tone of reproach, for it was very clear that Holmes was not listening. His face was rigid and his eyes gazed abstractedly at the ceiling.
"Singular! Most singular!" he murmured. "These details were new to me, Mr. Bennett. I think we have now fairly gone over the old ground, have we not?
The pleasant, open face of our visitor clouded over, shadowed by some grim remembrance. "What I speak of occurred the night before last," said he.
I was lying awake about two in the morning, when I was aware of a dull muffled sound coming from the passage.
I opened my door and peeped out. I should explain that the Professor sleeps at the end of the passage----
He sleeps at the end of the passage, and would have to pass my door in order to reach the staircase. It was a really terrifying experience, Mr. Holmes.
I think that I am as strong-nerved as my neighbours, but I was shaken by what I saw. The passage was dark save that one window half-way along it threw a patch of light.
I could see that something was coming along the passage, something dark and crouching. Then suddenly it emerged into the light, and I saw that it was he.
He was crawling, Mr. Holmes--crawling! He was not quite on his hands and knees. I should rather say on his hands and feet, with his face sunk between his hands.
Yet he seemed to move with ease. I was so paralysed by the sight that it was not until he had reached my door that I was able to step forward and ask if I could assist him.
His answer was extraordinary. He sprang up, spat out some atrocious word at me, and hurried on past me, and down the staircase.
I waited about for an hour, but he did not come back. It must have been daylight before he regained his room.
"Well, Watson, what make you of that?" asked Holmes, with the air of the pathologist who presents a rare specimen.
Lumbago, possibly. I have known a severe attack make a man walk in just such a way, and nothing would be more trying to the temper.
Good, Watson! You always keep us flat-footed on the ground. But we can hardly accept lumbago, since he was able to stand erect in a moment.
"He was never better in health," said Bennett. "In fact, he is stronger than I have known him for years.
"Speaking as a medical man," said I, "it appears to be a case for an alienist. The old gentleman's cerebral processes were disturbed by the love affair.
He made a journey abroad in the hope of breaking himself of the passion. His letters and the box may be connected with some other private transaction--a loan, perhaps, or share certificates, which are in the box.
And the wolf-hound no doubt disapproved of the financial bargain. No, no, Watson, there is more in it than this.
What Sherlock Holmes was about to suggest will never be known, for at this moment the door opened and a young lady was shown into the room.
As she appeared Mr. Bennett sprang up with a cry and ran forward with his hands out to meet those which she had herself outstretched.
I felt I must follow you. Oh, Jack, I have been so dreadfully frightened! It is awful to be there alone.
"We were gradually coming to that conclusion, were we not, Watson?" Holmes answered, with a smile. "I take it, Miss Presbury, that there is some fresh development in the case, and that you thought we should know?"
Our new visitor, a bright, handsome girl of a conventional English type, smiled back at Holmes as she seated herself beside Mr. Bennett.
When I found Mr. Bennett had left his hotel I thought I should probably find him here. Of course, he had told me that he would consult you.
I have hopes, Miss Presbury, but the case is still obscure. Perhaps what you have to say may throw some fresh light upon it.
It was last night, Mr. Holmes. He had been very strange all day. I am sure that there are times when he has no recollection of what he does.
He lives as in a strange dream. Yesterday was such a day. It was not my father with whom I lived. His outward shell was there, but it was not really he.
I was awakened in the night by the dog barking most furiously. Poor Roy, he is chained now near the stable.
I may say that I always sleep with my door locked; for, as Jack--as Mr. Bennett--will tell you, we all have a feeling of impending danger.
My room is on the second floor. It happened that the blind was up in my window, and there was bright moonlight outside.
As I lay with my eyes fixed upon the square of light, listening to the frenzied barkings of the dog, I was amazed to see my father's face looking in at me.
Mr. Holmes, I nearly died of surprise and horror. There it was pressed against the window-pane, and one hand seemed to be raised as if to push up the window.
If that window had opened, I think I should have gone mad. It was no delusion, Mr. Holmes. Don't deceive yourself by thinking so.
I dare say it was twenty seconds or so that I lay paralysed and watched the face. Then it vanished, but I could not--I could not spring out of bed and look out after it.
I lay cold and shivering till morning. At breakfast he was sharp and fierce in manner, and made no allusion to the adventure of the night.
My dear young lady, you say that your room is on the second floor. Is there a long ladder in the garden?
No, Mr. Holmes; that is the amazing part of it. There is no possible way of reaching the window--and yet he was there.
It was the young lady's turn to look surprised. "This is the second time that you have alluded to the date, Mr. Holmes," said Bennett.
No, I assure you. It was quite a different line of thought. Possibly you can leave your notebook with me and I will check the dates.
We will therefore call upon him as if he had given us an appointment upon such a date. He will put it down to his own lack of memory.
"That is excellent," said Mr. Bennett. "I warn you, however, that the Professor is irascible and violent at times."
Holmes smiled. "There are reasons why we should come at once--very cogent reasons if my theories hold good.
To-morrow, Mr. Bennett, will certainly see us in Camford. There is, if I remember right, an inn called the 'Chequers' where the port used to be above mediocrity, and the linen was above reproach.
Holmes made no allusion to the case until after we had deposited our suit-cases at the ancient hostel of which he had spoken.
I think, Watson, that we can catch the Professor just before lunch. He lectures at eleven, and should have an interval at home.
There was a period of excitement upon August 26. We will assume that he is a little hazy as to what he does at such times.
If we insist that we are there by appointment I think he will hardly venture to contradict us. Have you the effrontery necessary to put it through?
Excellent, Watson! Compound of the Busy Bee and Excelsior. We can but try--the motto of the firm. A friendly native will surely guide us.
A moment later we were actually in his sanctum, and the mysterious scientist, whose vagaries had brought us from London, was standing before us.
Possibly there is some mistake. I heard through a second person that Professor Presbury of Camford had need of my services.
"Oh, indeed!" It seemed to me that there was a malicious sparkle in the intense grey eyes. "You heard that, did you?
I am sorry, Professor, but the matter was rather confidential. If I have made a mistake there is no harm done.
Not at all. I should wish to go further into this matter. It interests me. Have you any scrap of writing, any letter or telegram, to bear out your assertion?
"No, I dare say not," said the Professor, with asperity. "However, that particular one can be answered very easily without your aid."
Come in, Mr. Bennett. These two gentlemen have come from London under the impression that they have been summoned.
"That is conclusive," said the Professor, glaring angrily at my companion. "Now, sir"--he leaned forward with his two hands upon the table--"it seems to me that your position is a very questionable one."
"Hardly enough, Mr. Holmes!" the old man cried, in a high screaming voice, with extraordinary malignancy upon his face.
He got between us and the door as he spoke, and he shook his two hands at us with furious passion. "You can hardly get out of it so easily as that."
His face was convulsed and he grinned and gibbered at us in his senseless rage. I am convinced that we should have had to fight our way out of the room if Mr. Bennett had not intervened.
"My dear Professor," he cried, "consider your position! Consider the scandal at the University! Mr. Holmes is a well-known man.
Sulkily our host--if I may call him so--cleared the path to the door. We were glad to find ourselves outside the house, and in the quiet of the tree-lined drive.
"Our learned friend's nerves are somewhat out of order," said he. "Perhaps our intrusion was a little crude, and yet we have gained that personal contact which I desired.
There were the sounds of running feet behind, but it was, to my relief, not the formidable Professor but his assistant who appeared round the curve of the drive.
I have never seen him in a more dangerous mood. But he grows more sinister. You can understand now why his daughter and I are alarmed.
"Too clear!" said Holmes. "That was my miscalculation. It is evident that his memory is much more reliable than I had thought.
Dear me, it seems hardly accessible. And yet you will observe that there is a creeper below and a water-pipe above which give some foothold.
There was one other thing I wished to tell you, Mr. Holmes. I have the address of the man in London to whom the Professor writes.
He seems to have written this morning and I got it from his blotting-paper. It is an ignoble position for a trusted secretary, but what else can I do?
Dorak--a curious name. Slavonic, I imagine. Well, it is an important link in the chain. We return to London this afternoon, Mr. Bennett.
I see no good purpose to be served by our remaining. We cannot arrest the Professor, because he has done no crime, nor can we place him under constraint, for he cannot be proved to be mad.
A little patience, Mr. Bennett. Things will soon develop. Unless I am mistaken next Tuesday may mark a crisis.
Certainly we shall be in Camford on that day. Meanwhile, the general position is undeniably unpleasant, and if Miss Presbury can prolong her visit----
Then let her stay till we can assure her that all danger is past. Meanwhile, let him have his way and do not cross him.
"There he is!" said Bennett, in a startled whisper. Looking between the branches we saw the tall, erect figure emerge from the hall door and look around him.
He stood leaning forward, his hands swinging straight before him, his head turning from side to side.
The secretary with a last wave slipped off among the trees, and we saw him presently rejoin his employer, the two entering the house together in what seemed to be animated and even excited conversation.
"I expect the old gentleman has been putting two and two together," said Holmes, as we walked hotelwards.
Holmes stopped at a post office and sent off a telegram on our way. The answer reached us in the evening, and he tossed it across to me.
Have visited the Commercial Road and seen Dorak. Suave person, Bohemian, elderly. Keeps large general store.--Mercer.
"Mercer is since your time," said Holmes. "He is my general utility man who looks up routine business.
It was important to know something of the man with whom our Professor was so secretly corresponding. His nationality connects up with the Prague visit.
"Thank goodness that something connects with something," said I. "At present we seem to be faced by a long series of inexplicable incidents with no bearing upon each other.
For example, what possible connection can there be between an angry wolf-hound and a visit to Bohemia, or either of them with a man crawling down a passage at night?
Holmes smiled and rubbed his hands. We were, I may say, seated in the old sitting-room of the ancient hotel, with a bottle of the famous vintage of which Holmes had spoken on the table between us.
"Well, now, let us take the dates first," said he, his finger-tips together and his manner as if he were addressing a class.
This excellent young man's diary shows that there was trouble upon July 2, and from then onwards it seems to have been at nine-day intervals, with, so far as I remember, only one exception.
Thus the last outbreak upon Friday was on September 3, which also falls into the series, as did August 26, which preceded it.
Let us, then, form the provisional theory that every nine days the Professor takes some strong drug which has a passing but highly poisonous effect.
His naturally violent nature is intensified by it. He learned to take this drug while he was in Prague, and is now supplied with it by a Bohemian intermediary in London.
Well, well, we have made a beginning. I should not expect any fresh developments until next Tuesday. In the meantime we can only keep in touch with friend Bennett and enjoy the amenities of this charming town.
In the morning Mr. Bennett slipped round to bring us the latest report. As Holmes had imagined, times had not been easy with him.
Without exactly accusing him of being responsible for our presence, the Professor had been very rough and rude in his speech, and evidently felt some strong grievance.
This morning he was quite himself again, however, and had delivered his usual brilliant lecture to a crowded class.
"Apart from his queer fits," said Bennett, "he has actually more energy and vitality than I can ever remember, nor was his brain ever clearer.
"I don't think you have anything to fear now for a week at least," Holmes answered. "I am a busy man, and Dr. Watson has his patients to attend to.
Let us agree that we meet here at this hour next Tuesday, and I shall be surprised if before we leave you again we are not able to explain, even if we cannot perhaps put an end to, your troubles.
I saw nothing of my friend for the next few days, but on the following Monday evening I had a short note asking me to meet him next day at the train.
From what he told me as we travelled up to Camford all was well, the peace of the Professor's house had been unruffled, and his own conduct perfectly normal.
This also was the report which was given us by Mr. Bennett himself when he called upon us that evening at our old quarters in the "Chequers."
He heard from his London correspondent to-day. There was a letter and there was a small packet, each with the cross under the stamp which warned me not to touch them.
"That may prove quite enough," said Holmes grimly. "Now, Mr. Bennett, we shall, I think, come to some conclusion to-night.
If my deductions are correct we should have an opportunity of bringing matters to a head. In order to do so it is necessary to hold the Professor under observation.
I would suggest, therefore, that you remain awake and on the look out. Should you hear him pass your door do not interrupt him, but follow him as discreetly as you can.
Dr. Watson and I will not be far off. By the way, where is the key of that little box of which you spoke?
I fancy our researches must lie in that direction. At the worst the lock should not be very formidable.
We might possibly want him. Well, we can do no more until we see how things develop. Good-bye--but I expect that we shall see you before morning.
It was nearly midnight before we took our station among some bushes immediately opposite the hall door of the Professor.
It was a fine night, but chilly, and we were glad of our warm overcoats. There was a breeze, and clouds were scudding across the sky, obscuring from time to time the half-moon.
It would have been a dismal vigil were it not for the expectation and excitement which carried us along, and the assurance of my comrade that we had probably reached the end of the strange sequence of events which had engaged our attention.
"If the cycle of nine days holds good then we shall have the Professor at his worst to-night," said Holmes.
What he takes and why he takes it are still beyond our ken, but that it emanates in some way from Prague is clear enough.
He takes it under definite directions which regulate this ninth-day system, which was the first point which attracted my attention.
Thick and horny in a way which is quite new in my experience. Always look at the hands first, Watson.
Then cuffs, trouser-knees, and boots. Very curious knuckles which can only be explained by the mode of progression observed by----" Holmes paused, and suddenly clapped his hand to his forehead.
Oh, Watson, Watson, what a fool I have been! It seems incredible, and yet it must be true. All points in one direction.
How could I miss seeing the connection of ideas? Those knuckles--how could I have passed those knuckles?
And the dog! And the ivy! It's surely time that I disappeared into that little farm of my dreams. Look out, Watson!
The hall door had slowly opened, and against the lamp-lit background we saw the tall figure of Professor Presbury.
He was clad in his dressing-gown. As he stood outlined in the doorway he was erect but leaning forward with dangling arms, as when we saw him last.
He moved along the face of the house and then round the corner. As he disappeared Bennett slipped through the hall door and softly followed him.
The Professor was clearly visible crouching at the foot of the ivy-covered wall. As we watched him he suddenly began with incredible agility to ascend it.
From branch to branch he sprang, sure of foot and firm of grasp, climbing apparently in mere joy at his own powers, with no definite object in view.
With his dressing-gown flapping on each side of him he looked like some huge bat glued against the side of his own house, a great square dark patch upon the moonlit wall.
Presently he tired of this amusement, and, dropping from branch to branch, he squatted down into the old attitude and moved towards the stables, creeping along in the same strange way as before.
The wolf-hound was out now, barking furiously, and more excited than ever when it actually caught sight of its master.
It was straining on its chain, and quivering with eagerness and rage. The Professor squatted down very deliberately just out of reach of the hound, and began to provoke it in every possible way.
In all our adventures I do not know that I have ever seen a more strange sight than this impassive and still dignified figure crouching frog-like upon the ground and goading to a wilder exhibition of passion the maddened hound, which ramped and raged in front of him, by all manner of ingenious and calculated cruelty.
And then in a moment it happened! It was not the chain that broke, but it was the collar that slipped, for it had been made for a thick-necked Newfoundland.
We heard the rattle of falling metal, and the next instant dog and man were rolling on the ground together, the one roaring in rage, the other screaming in a strange shrill falsetto of terror.
It might have been a dangerous task for us, but Bennett's voice and presence brought the great wolf-hound instantly to reason.
The uproar had brought the sleepy and astonished coachman from his room above the stables. "I'm not surprised," said he, shaking his head.
The hound was secured, and together we carried the Professor up to his room, where Bennett, who had a medical degree, helped me to dress his torn throat.
"For God's sake, no!" cried Bennett. "At present the scandal is confined to our own household. It is safe with us.
If it gets beyond these walls it will never stop. Consider his position at the University, his European reputation, the feelings of his daughter.
"Quite so," said Holmes. "I think it may be quite possible to keep the matter to ourselves, and also to prevent its recurrence now that we have a free hand.
The key from the watch-chain, Mr. Bennett. Macphail will guard the patient and let us know if there is any change.
There was not much, but there was enough--an empty phial, another nearly full, a hypodermic syringe, several letters in a crabbed, foreign hand.
The marks on the envelopes showed that they were those which had disturbed the routine of the secretary, and each was dated from the Commercial Road and signed "A.
Dorak." They were mere invoices to say that a fresh bottle was being sent to Professor Presbury, or receipts to acknowledge money.
There was one other envelope, however, in a more educated hand and bearing the Austrian stamp with the postmark of Prague.
Lowenstein of Prague! Lowenstein with the wondrous strength-giving serum, tabooed by the profession because he refused to reveal its source.
Many details are added. Well, thanks to you, Mr. Holmes, it is very clear that we have traced the evil to its source.
"The real source," said Holmes, "lies, of course, in that untimely love affair which gave our impetuous Professor the idea that he could only gain his wish by turning himself into a younger man.
When one tries to rise above Nature one is liable to fall below it. The highest type of man may revert to the animal if he leaves the straight road of destiny.
But it may recur. Others may find a better way. There is danger there--a very real danger to humanity.
Consider, Watson, that the material, the sensual, the worldly would all prolong their worthless lives.
The spiritual would not avoid the call to something higher. It would be the survival of the least fit.
What sort of cesspool may not our poor world become?" Suddenly the dreamer disappeared, and Holmes, the man of action, sprang from his chair.
I think there is nothing more to be said, Mr. Bennett. The various incidents will now fit themselves easily into the general scheme.
The dog, of course, was aware of the change far more quickly than you. His smell would ensure that. It was the monkey, not the Professor, whom Roy attacked, just as it was the monkey who teased Roy.
Climbing was a joy to the creature, and it was a mere chance, I take it, that the pastime brought him to the young lady's window.
There is an early train to town, Watson, but I think we shall just have time for a cup of tea at the 'Chequers' before we catch it.
At this period of my life the good Watson had passed almost beyond my ken. An occasional week-end visit was the most that I ever saw of him.
Thus I must act as my own chronicler. Ah! had he but been with me, how much he might have made of so wonderful a happening and of my eventual triumph against every difficulty!
As it is, however, I must needs tell my tale in my own plain way, showing by my words each step upon the difficult road which lay before me as I searched for the mystery of the Lion's Mane.
This admirable beach extends for some miles in each direction, save only at one point where the little cove and village of Fulworth break the line.
My house is lonely. I, my old housekeeper, and my bees have the estate all to ourselves. Half a mile off, however, is Harold Stackhurst's well-known coaching establishment.
The Gables, quite a large place, which contains some score of young fellows preparing for various professions, with a staff of several masters.
Stackhurst himself was a well-known rowing Blue in his day, and an excellent all-round scholar. He and I were always friendly from the day I came to the coast, and he was the one man who was on such terms with me that we could drop in on each other in the evenings without an invitation.
Towards the end of July, 1907, there was a severe gale, the wind blowing up-Channel, heaping the seas to the base of the cliffs, and leaving a lagoon at the turn of the tide.
I walked along the cliff path which led to the steep descent to the beach. As I walked I heard a shout behind me, and there was Harold Stackhurst waving his hand in cheery greeting.
"At your old tricks again," he laughed, patting his bulging pocket. "Yes. McPherson started early, and I expect I may find him there."
Fitzroy McPherson was the science master, a fine upstanding young fellow whose life had been crippled by heart trouble following rheumatic fever.
He was a natural athlete, however, and excelled in every game which did not throw too great a strain upon him.
At this moment we saw the man himself. His head showed above the edge of the cliff where the path ends.
Then his whole figure appeared at the top, staggering like a drunken man. The next instant he threw up his hands, and, with a terrible cry, fell upon his face.
Stackhurst and I rushed forward--it may have been fifty yards--and turned him on his back. He was obviously dying.
Those glazed sunken eyes and dreadful livid cheeks could mean nothing else. One glimmer of life came into his face for an instant, and he uttered two or three words with an eager air of warning.
They were slurred and indistinct, but to my ear the last of them, which burst in a shriek from his lips, were "the lion's mane."
My companion was paralysed by the sudden horror of it, but I, as may well be imagined, had every sense on the alert.
As he fell over, his Burberry, which had been simply thrown round his shoulders, slipped off, exposing his trunk.
We stared at it in amazement. His back was covered with dark red lines as though he had been terribly flogged by a thin wire scourge.
The instrument with which this punishment had been inflicted was clearly flexible, for the long, angry weals curved round his shoulders and ribs.
There was blood dripping down his chin, for he had bitten through his lower lip in the paroxysm of his agony.
I was kneeling and Stackhurst standing by the body when a shadow fell across us, and we found that Ian Murdoch was by our side.
Murdoch was the mathematical coach at the establishment, a tall, dark, thin man, so taciturn and aloof that none can be said to have been his friend.
He seemed to live in some high, abstract region of surds and conic sections with little to connect him with ordinary life.
Such was the strange, complex man who now appeared beside us. He seemed to be honestly shocked at the sight before him, though the incident of the dog may show that there was no great sympathy between the dead man and himself.
No, no, I was late this morning. I was not on the beach at all. I have come straight from The Gables.
Without a word he made off at top speed, and I proceeded to take the matter in hand, while Stackhurst, dazed at this tragedy, remained by the body.
No one else had gone down to the beach by this track that morning. At one place I observed the print of an open hand with the fingers towards the incline.
This could only mean that poor McPherson had fallen as he ascended. There were rounded depressions, too, which suggested that he had come down upon his knees more than once.
At the bottom of the path was the considerable lagoon left by the retreating tide. At the side of it McPherson had undressed, for there lay his towel on a rock.
The latter fact proved that he had made all ready to bathe, though the towel indicated that he had not actually done so.
And here was the problem clearly defined--as strange a one as had ever confronted me. The man had not been on the beach more than a quarter of an hour at the most.
Stackhurst had followed him from The Gables, so there could be no doubt about that. He had gone to bathe and had stripped, as the naked footsteps showed.
Then he had suddenly huddled on his clothes again--they were all dishevelled and unfastened--and he had returned without bathing, or at any rate without drying himself.
Who had done this barbarous deed? There were, it is true, small grottos and caves in the base of the cliffs, but the low sun shone directly into them, and there was no place for concealment.
On the sea two or three fishing-boats were at no great distance. Their occupants might be examined at our leisure.
When I at last returned to the body I found that a little group of wandering folk had gathered round it.
I'd be glad of your advice, Mr. Holmes. This is a big thing for me to handle, and I'll hear of it from Lewes if I go wrong.
I advised him to send for his immediate superior, and for a doctor; also to allow nothing to be moved, and as few fresh footmarks as possible to be made, until they came.
In the meantime I searched the dead man's pockets. There were his handkerchief, a large knife, and a small folding card-case.
From this projected a slip of paper, which I unfolded and handed to the constable. There was written on it in a scrawling, feminine hand: "I will be there, you may be sure.--Maudie."
It read like a love affair, an assignation, though when and where were a blank. The constable replaced it in the card-case and returned it with the other things to the pockets of the Burberry.
Then, as nothing more suggested itself, I walked back to my house for breakfast, having first arranged that the base of the cliffs should be thoroughly searched.
Stackhurst was round in an hour or two to tell me that the body had been removed to The Gables, where the inquest would be held.
"The police have the letters," he explained. "I could not bring them. But there is no doubt that it was a serious love affair.
I see no reason, however, to connect it with that horrible happening save, indeed, that the lady had made an appointment with him.
"Ian Murdoch held them back," said he; "he would insist upon some algebraic demonstration before breakfast.
At one time they were not. But for a year or more Murdoch has been as near to McPherson as he ever could be to anyone.
So I understand. I seem to remember your telling me once about a quarrel over the ill-usage of a dog.
Everyone knows her. She is the beauty of the neighbourhood--a real beauty, Holmes, who would draw attention everywhere.
I knew that McPherson was attracted by her, but I had no notion that it had gone so far as these letters would seem to indicate.
She is the daughter of old Tom Bellamy, who owns all the boats and bathing-cots at Fulworth. He was a fisherman to start with, but is now a man of some substance.
Oh, we can easily find a pretext. After all, this poor man did not ill-use himself in this outrageous way.
Some human hand was on the handle of that scourge, if indeed it was a scourge which inflicted the injuries.
His circle of acquaintances in this lonely place was surely limited. Let us follow it up in every direction and we can hardly fail to come upon the motive, which in turn should lead us to the criminal.
It would have been a pleasant walk across the thyme-scented Downs had our minds not been poisoned by the tragedy we had witnessed.
The village of Fulworth lies in a hollow curving in a semicircle round the bay. Behind the old-fashioned hamlet several modern houses have been built upon the rising ground.
That's The Haven, as Bellamy called it. The one with the corner tower and slate roof. Not bad for a man who started with nothing but---- By Jove, look at that!
The garden gate of The Haven had opened and a man had emerged. There was no mistaking that tall, angular, straggling figure.
"Hullo!" said Stackhurst. The man nodded, gave us a sideways glance from his curious dark eyes, and would have passed us, but his principal pulled him up.
Murdoch's face flushed with anger. "I am your subordinate, sir, under your roof. I am not aware that I owe you any account of my private actions."
Stackhurst's nerves were near the surface after all he had endured. Otherwise, perhaps, he would have waited.
This is not the first time that I have had to overlook your insubordinate ways. It will certainly be the last.
He strode off upon his way, while Stackhurst, with angry eyes, stood glaring after him. "Is he not an impossible, intolerable man?"
The one thing that impressed itself forcibly upon my mind was that Mr. Ian Murdoch was taking the first chance to open a path of escape from the scene of the crime.
Suspicion, vague and nebulous, was now beginning to take outline in my mind. Perhaps the visit to the Bellamys might throw some further light upon the matter.
Mr. Bellamy proved to be a middle-aged man with a flaming red beard. He seemed to be in a very angry mood, and his face was soon as florid as his hair.
Yes, sir, the word 'marriage' was never mentioned, and yet there were letters and meetings, and a great deal more of which neither of us could approve.
But the words were taken from his mouth by the appearance of the lady herself. There was no gainsaying that she would have graced any assembly in the world.
Such was the girl who had pushed open the door and stood now, wide-eyed and intense, in front of Harold Stackhurst.
"There is no reason why my sister should be brought into the matter," growled the younger man. The sister turned a sharp, fierce look upon him.
This is my business, William. Kindly leave me to manage it in my own way. By all accounts there has been a crime committed.
She listened to a short account from my companion, with a composed concentration which showed me that she possessed strong character as well as great beauty.
Maud Bellamy will always remain in my memory as a most complete and remarkable woman. It seems that she already knew me by sight, for she turned to me at the end.
"Bring them to justice, Mr. Holmes. You have my sympathy and my help, whoever they may be." It seemed to me that she glanced defiantly at her father and brother as she spoke.
"Thank you," said I. "I value a woman's instinct in such matters. You use the word 'they.' You think that more than one was concerned?"
I knew Mr. McPherson well enough to be aware that he was a brave and a strong man. No single person could ever have inflicted such an outrage upon him.
"The whole world will know the facts presently, so there can be no harm if I discuss them here," said I.
I should have preferred privacy, but if your father will not allow it, he must share the deliberations.
Then I spoke of the note which had been found in the dead man's pocket. "It is sure to be produced at the inquest.
"It was your prejudice against him which prevented us from telling you. As to this appointment"--she fumbled in her dress and produced a crumpled note--"it was in answer to this."
"DEAREST," ran the message: "The old place on the beach just after sunset on Tuesday. It is the only time I can get away.--F.M."
I would rather not answer that question. It has really nothing to do with the matter which you are investigating.
There was a time when I thought he was. But that was all changed when he understood the relations between Fitzroy and myself.
Again the shadow round this strange man seemed to me to be taking more definite shape. His record must be examined.
His rooms must be privately searched. Stackhurst was a willing collaborator, for in his mind also suspicions were forming.
We returned from our visit to The Haven with the hope that one free end of this tangled skein was already in our hands.
A week passed. The inquest had thrown no light upon the matter and had been adjourned for further evidence.
Stackhurst had made discreet inquiry about his subordinate, and there had been a superficial search of his room, but without result.
Personally, I had gone over the whole ground again, both physically and mentally, but with no new conclusions.
In all my chronicles the reader will find no case which brought me so completely to the limit of my powers.
Even my imagination could conceive no solution to the mystery. And then there came the incident of the dog.
It was my old housekeeper who heard of it first by that strange wireless by which such people collect the news of the country-side.
Why, sir, everyone is talking of it. It took on terrible, and has eaten nothing for a week. Then to-day two of the young gentlemen from The Gables found it dead--down on the beach, sir, at the very place where its master met his end.
"At the very place." The words stood out clear in my memory. Some dim perception that the matter was vital rose in my mind.
That the dog should die was after the beautiful, faithful nature of dogs. But 'in the very place'! Why should this lonely beach be fatal to it?
Was it possible that it also, had been sacrificed to some revengeful feud? Was it possible----? Yes, the perception was dim, but already something was building up in my mind.
In a few minutes I was on my way to The Gables, where I found Stackhurst in his study. At my request he sent for Sudbury and Blount, the two students who had found the dog.
"Yes, it lay on the very edge of the pool," said one of them. "It must have followed the trail of its dead master."
I saw the faithful little creature, an Airedale terrier, laid out upon the mat in the hall. The body was stiff and rigid, the eyes projecting, and the limbs contorted.
From The Gables I walked down to the bathing-pool. The sun had sunk and the shadow of the great cliff lay black across the water, which glimmered dully like a sheet of lead.
The place was deserted and there was no sign of life save for two sea-birds circling and screaming overhead.
In the fading light I could dimly make out the little dog's spoor upon the sand round the very rock on which his master's towel had been laid.
For a long time I stood in deep meditation while the shadows grew darker around me. My mind was filled with racing thoughts.
That was how I felt that evening as I stood alone by that place of death. Then at last I turned and walked slowly homewards.
I had just reached the top of the path when it came to me. Like a flash, I remembered the thing for which I had so eagerly and vainly grasped.
You will know, or Watson has written in vain, that I hold a vast store of out-of-the-way knowledge, without scientific system, but very available for the needs of my work.
My mind is like a crowded box-room with packets of all sorts stowed away therein--so many that I may well have but a vague perception of what was there.
I had known that there was something which might bear upon this matter. It was still vague, but at least I knew how I could make it clear.
It was monstrous, incredible, and yet it was always a possibility. I would test it to the full. There is a great garret in my little house which is stuffed with books.
It was into this that I plunged and rummaged for an hour. At the end of that time I emerged with a little chocolate and silver volume.
But that work met with an annoying interruption. I had hardly swallowed my early cup of tea and was starting for the beach when I had a call from Inspector Bardie of the Sussex Constabulary--a steady, solid, bovine man with thoughtful eyes, which looked at me now with a very troubled expression.
"I know your immense experience, sir," said he. "This is quite unofficial, of course, and need go no farther.
But I am fairly up against it in this McPherson case. The question is, shall I make an arrest, or shall I not?
Yes, sir. There is really no one else when you come to think of it. That's the advantage of this solitude.
He had gleaned along the same furrows as I had. There was Murdoch's character and the mystery which seemed to hang round the man.
He had all my points, but no fresh ones, save that Murdoch seemed to be making every preparation for departure.
"What would my position be if I let him slip away with all this evidence against him?" The burly, phlegmatic man was sorely troubled in his mind.
"Consider," I said, "all the essential gaps in your case. On the morning of the crime he can surely prove an alibi.
He had been with his scholars till the last moment, and within a few minutes of McPherson's appearance he came upon us from behind.
Then bear in mind the absolute impossibility that he could single-handed have inflicted this outrage upon a man quite as strong as himself.
I stepped to my bureau and brought out an enlarged photograph. "This is my method in such cases," I explained.
I should hardly be what I am if I did not. Now let us consider this weal which extends round the right shoulder.
Surely it is evident that it is unequal in its intensity. There is a dot of extravasated blood, here, and another there.
Perhaps I have. Perhaps I haven't. I may be able to say more soon. Anything which will define what made that mark will bring us a long way towards the criminal.
"It is, of course, an absurd idea," said the policeman, "but if a red-hot net of wire had been laid across the back, then these better-marked points would represent where the meshes crossed each other."
A most ingenious comparison. Or shall we say a very stiff cat-o'-nine-tails with small hard knots upon it?
Or there may be some very different cause, Mr. Bardie. But your case is far too weak for an arrest. Besides, we have those last words--'Lion's Mane.'
Yes, I have considered that. If the second word had borne any resemblance to Murdoch--but it did not.
Well, then, is it Bellamy and that big son of his? They were not too sweet upon Mr. McPherson. Could they have done him a mischief?
"No, no; you won't draw me until I am ready," said I with a smile. "Now, Inspector, we each have our own work to do.
He was not alone. Behind him came Stackhurst, hatless and panting, almost as distrait as his companion.
"Yes, yes, brandy!" he cried. "The man is at his last gasp. It was all I could do to bring him here. He fainted twice upon the way."
Half a tumbler of the raw spirit brought about a wondrous change. He pushed himself up on one arm and swung his coat from off his shoulders.
The Inspector and I cried out at the sight. There, criss-crossed upon the man's naked shoulder, was the same strange reticulated pattern of red, inflamed lines which had been the death-mark of Fitzroy McPherson.
At any moment he might die. More and more brandy was poured down his throat, each fresh dose bringing him back to life.
Pads of cotton-wool soaked in salad-oil seemed to take the agony from the strange wounds. At last his head fell heavily upon the cushion.
Exhausted Nature had taken refuge in its last storehouse of vitality. It was half a sleep and half a faint, but at least it was ease from pain.
To question him had been impossible, but the moment we were assured of his condition Stackhurst turned upon me.
Down on the beach. Exactly where poor McPherson met his end. If this man's heart had been weak as McPherson's was, he would not be here now.
More than once I thought he was gone as I brought him up. It was too far to The Gables, so I made for you.
I was walking on the cliff when I heard his cry. He was at the edge of the water, reeling about like a drunken man.
I think I can, Stackhurst. Come with me now! And you, Inspector, come along! We will see if we cannot deliver this murderer into your hands.
Leaving the unconscious man in the charge of my housekeeper, we all three went down to the deadly lagoon.
On the shingle there was piled a little heap of towels and clothes, left by the stricken man. Slowly I walked round the edge of the water, my comrades in Indian file behind me.
Most of the pool was quite shallow, but under the cliff where the beach was hollowed out it was four or five feet deep.
It was to this part that a swimmer would naturally go, for it formed a beautiful pellucid green pool as clear as crystal.
A line of rocks lay above it at the base of the cliff, and along this I led the way, peering eagerly into the depths beneath me.
I had reached the deepest and stillest pool when my eyes caught that for which they were searching, and I burst into a shout of triumph.
The strange object at which I pointed did indeed look like a tangled mass torn from the mane of a lion.
It lay upon a rocky shelf some three feet under the water, a curious waving, vibrating, hairy creature with streaks of silver among its yellow tresses.
"It has done mischief enough. Its day is over!" I cried. "Help me, Stackhurst! Let us end the murderer for ever."
There was a big boulder just above the ledge, and we pushed it until it fell with a tremendous splash into the water.
When the ripples had cleared we saw that it had settled upon the ledge below. One flapping edge of yellow membrane showed that our victim was beneath it.
A thick oily scum oozed out from below the stone and stained the water round, rising slowly to the surface.
"Well, this gets me!" cried the Inspector. "What was it, Mr. Holmes? I'm born and bred in these parts, but I never saw such a thing.
"Just as well for Sussex," I remarked. "It may have been the south-west gale that brought it up. Come back to my house, both of you, and I will give you the terrible experience of one who has good reason to remember his own meeting with the same peril of the seas."
When we reached my study, we found that Murdoch was so far recovered that he could sit up. He was dazed in mind, and every now and then was shaken by a paroxysm of pain.
In broken words he explained that he had no notion what had occurred to him, save that terrific pangs had suddenly shot through him, and that it had taken all his fortitude to reach the bank.
It nearly killed him, although he had only been exposed to it in the disturbed ocean and not in the narrow calm waters of a bathing-pool.
He says that he could hardly recognize himself afterwards, so white, wrinkled and shrivelled was his face.
He gulped down brandy, a whole bottleful, and it seems to have saved his life. There is the book, Inspector.
I leave it with you, and you cannot doubt that it contains a full explanation of the tragedy of poor McPherson.
"And incidentally exonerates me," remarked Ian Murdoch with a wry smile. "I do not blame you, Inspector, nor you, Mr. Holmes, for your suspicions were natural.
I feel that on the very eve of my arrest I have only cleared myself by sharing the fate of my poor friend.
No, Mr. Murdoch. I was already upon the track, and had I been out as early as I intended I might well have saved you from this terrific experience.
I am an omnivorous reader with a strangely retentive memory for trifles. That phrase 'Lion's Mane' haunted my mind.
I knew that I had seen it somewhere in an unexpected context. You have seen that it does describe the creature.
I have no doubt that it was floating on the water when McPherson saw it, and that this phrase was the only one by which he could convey to us a warning as to the creature which had been his death.
"Then I, at least, am cleared," said Murdoch, rising slowly to his feet. "There are one or two words of explanation which I should give, for I know the direction in which your inquiries have run.
It is true that I loved this lady, but from the day when she chose my friend McPherson my one desire was to help her to happiness.
She would not tell you, sir, of our relations lest you should disapprove and I might suffer. But with your leave I must try to get back to The Gables, for my bed will be very welcome.
Stackhurst held out his hand. "Our nerves have all been at concert-pitch," said he. "Forgive what is past, Murdoch.
We shall understand each other better in the future." They passed out together with their arms linked in friendly fashion.
"Well, you've done it!" he cried at last. "I had read of you, but I never believed it. It's wonderful!"
I was slow at the outset--culpably slow. Had the body been found in the water I could hardly have missed it.
It was the towel which misled me. The poor fellow had never thought to dry himself, and so I in turn was led to believe that he had never been in the water.
Why, then, should the attack of any water creature suggest itself to me? That was where I went astray.
Well, well, Inspector, I often ventured to chaff you gentlemen of the police force, but _Cyanea Capillata_ very nearly avenged Scotland Yard.
Concerning these latter, I may say that the writers of agonized letters, who beg that the honour of their families or the reputation of famous forbears may not be touched, have nothing to fear.
The discretion and high sense of professional honour which have always distinguished my friend are still at work in the choice of these memoirs, and no confidence will be abused.
I deprecate, however, in the strongest way the attempts which have been made lately to get at and to destroy these papers.
One forenoon--it was late in 1896--I received a hurried note from Holmes asking for my attendance. When I arrived, I found him seated in a smoke-laden atmosphere, with an elderly, motherly woman of the buxom landlady type in the corresponding chair in front of him.
"This is Mrs. Merrilow, of South Brixton," said my friend, with a wave of the hand. "Mrs. Merrilow does not object to tobacco, Watson, if you wish to indulge your filthy habits.
Mrs. Merrilow has an interesting story to tell which may well lead to further developments in which your presence may be useful.
You will understand, Mrs. Merrilow, that if I come to Mrs. Ronder I should prefer to have a witness. You will make her understand that before we arrive.
"Lord bless you, Mr. Holmes," said our visitor, "she is that anxious to see you that you might bring the whole parish at your heels!"
Then we shall come early in the afternoon. Let us see that we have our facts correct before we start.
If we go over them it will help Dr. Watson to understand the situation. You say that Mrs. Ronder has been your lodger for seven years and that you have only once seen her face.
That is the kind of face it is. When I saw her--I happened on her unawares--she covered up quick, and then she said, 'Now, Mrs. Merrilow, you know at last why it is that I never raise my veil.'
No, sir, but she gave hard cash, and plenty of it. A quarter's rent right down on the table in advance and no arguing about terms.
Mine stands well back from the road and is more private than most. Then, again, I only take the one, and I have no family of my own.
I reckon she had tried others and found that mine suited her best. It's privacy she is after, and she is ready to pay for it.
You say that she never showed her face from first to last save on the one accidental occasion. Well, it is a very remarkable story, most remarkable, and I don't wonder that you want it examined.
I don't, Mr. Holmes. I am quite satisfied so long as I get my rent. You could not have a quieter lodger, or one who gives less trouble.
Her health, Mr. Holmes. She seems to be wasting away. And there's something terrible on her mind. 'Murder!'
So I went to her in the morning. 'Mrs. Ronder,' I says, 'if you have anything that is troubling your soul, there's the clergy,' I says, 'and there's the police.
Between them you should get some help.' 'For God's sake, not the police!' says she, 'and the clergy can't change what is past.
Say that, and give him the name Abbas Parva.' Here it is as she wrote it, Abbas Parva. 'That will bring him, if he's the man I think he is.'
"And it will, too," remarked Holmes. "Very good, Mrs. Merrilow. I should like to have a little chat with Dr. Watson.
That will carry us till lunch-time. About three o'clock you may expect to see us at your house in Brixton.
For a few minutes there was a constant swish of the leaves, and then with a grunt of satisfaction he came upon what he sought.
So excited was he that he did not rise, but sat upon the floor like some strange Buddha, with crossed legs, the huge books all round him, and one open upon his knees.
The case worried me at the time, Watson. Here are my marginal notes to prove it. I confess that I could make nothing of it.
And yet I was convinced that the coroner was wrong. Have you no recollection of the Abbas Parva tragedy?
And yet you were with me then. But certainly my own impression was very superficial, for there was nothing to go by, and none of the parties had engaged my services.
It seems that the whole camp was roused near midnight by the roars of the animal and the screams of the woman.
Ronder lay, with the back of his head crushed in and deep claw-marks across his scalp, some ten yards from the cage, which was open.
Close to the door of the cage lay Mrs. Ronder, upon her back, with the creature squatting and snarling above her.
How it had got loose was a mystery. It was conjectured that the pair intended to enter the cage, but that when the door was loosed the creature bounded out upon them.
There was no other point of interest in the evidence, save that the woman in a delirium of agony kept screaming, 'Coward!
Coward!' as she was carried back to the van in which they lived. It was six months before she was fit to give evidence, but the inquest was duly held, with the obvious verdict of death from misadventure.
You may well say so. And yet there were one or two points which worried young Edmunds, of the Berkshire Constabulary.
A smart lad that! He was sent later to Allahabad. That was how I came into the matter, for he dropped in and smoked a pipe or two over it.
Well, we were both worried. It was so deucedly difficult to reconstruct the affair. Look at it from the lion's point of view.
He is liberated. What does he do? He takes half a dozen bounds forward, which brings him to Ronder. Ronder turns to fly,--the claw-marks were on the back of his head--but the lion strikes him down.
Then, instead of bounding on and escaping, he returns to the woman, who was close to the cage, and he knocks her over and chews her face up.
Then, again, those cries of hers would seem to imply that her husband had in some way failed her. What could the poor devil have done to help her?
And then there was another thing. It comes back to me now as I think it over. There was some evidence that, just at the time the lion roared and the woman screamed, a man began shouting in terror.
Well, if his skull was smashed in you would hardly expect to hear from him again. There were at least two witnesses who spoke of the cries of a man being mingled with those of a woman.
I should think the whole camp was crying out by then. As to the other points, I think I could suggest a solution.
The two were together, ten yards from the cage, when the lion got loose. The man turned and was struck down.
The woman conceived the idea of getting into the cage and shutting the door. It was her only refuge. She made for it, and just as she reached it the beast bounded after her and knocked her over.
She was angry with her husband for having encouraged the beast's rage by turning. If they had faced it, they might have cowed it.
And why should it attack them savagely when it was in the habit of playing with them, and doing tricks with them inside the cage?
Well, Watson, there is this to be said for your theory. Ronder was a man of many enemies. Edmunds told me that in his cups he was horrible.
A huge bully of a man, he cursed and slashed at everyone who came in his way. I expect those cries about a monster, of which our visitor has spoken, were nocturnal reminiscences of the dear departed.
However, our speculations are futile until we have all the facts. There is a cold partridge on the sideboard, Watson, and a bottle of Montrachet.
When our hansom deposited us at the house of Mrs. Merrilow, we found that plump lady blocking up the open door of her humble but retired abode.
It was very clear that her chief preoccupation was lest she should lose a valuable lodger, and she implored us, before showing us up, to say and do nothing which could lead to so undesirable an end.
Then, having reassured her, we followed her up the straight, badly-carpeted staircase and were shown into the room of the mysterious lodger.
A thick dark veil covered her face, but it was cut off close at her upper lip, and disclosed a perfectly-shaped mouth and a delicately-rounded chin.
I could well conceive that she had indeed been a very remarkable woman. Her voice, too, was well-modulated and pleasing.
I learned it when I had recovered my health and was examined by Mr. Edmunds, the County detective. I fear I lied to him.
Because the fate of someone else depended upon it. I know that he was a very worthless being, and yet I would not have his destruction upon my conscience.
Because there is another person to be considered. That other person is myself. I could not stand the scandal and publicity which would come from a police examination.
I have not long to live, but I wish to die undisturbed. And yet I wanted to find one man of judgment to whom I could tell my terrible story, so that when I am gone all might be understood.
You compliment me, madam. At the same time, I am a responsible person. I do not promise you that when you have spoken I may not myself think it my duty to refer the case to the police.
I think not, Mr. Holmes. I know your character and methods too well, for I have followed your work for some years.
Reading is the only pleasure which Fate has left me, and I miss little which passes in the world. But in any case, I will take my chance of the use which you may make of my tragedy.
The woman rose and took from a drawer the photograph of a man. He was clearly a professional acrobat, a man of magnificent physique, taken with his huge arms folded across his swollen chest and a smile breaking from under his heavy moustache--the self-satisfied smile of the man of many conquests.
It was a dreadful face--a human pig, or rather a human wild boar, for it was formidable in its bestiality.
One could imagine that vile mouth champing and foaming in its rage, and one could conceive those small, vicious eyes darting pure malignancy as they looked forth upon the world, Ruffian, bully, beast--it was all written on that heavy-jowled face.
And then the terrible thing happened. You may have heard how quick these creatures are to scent human blood, and how it excites them.
Some strange instinct had told the creature in one instant that a human being had been slain. As I slipped the bars it bounded out, and was on me in an instant.
Leonardo could have saved me. If he had rushed forward and struck the beast with his club he might have cowed it.
But the man lost his nerve. I heard him shout in his terror, and then I saw him turn and fly. At the same instant the teeth of the lion met in my face.
I was conscious that the camp was stirring, and then dimly I remember a group of men, Leonardo, Griggs and others, dragging me from under the creature's paws.
That was all that was left to me to do--and that is what I have done. A poor wounded beast that has crawled into its hole to die--that is the end of Eugenia Ronder.
We sat in silence for some time after the unhappy woman had told her story. Then Holmes stretched out his long arm and patted her hand with such a show of sympathy as I had seldom known him to exhibit.
"Poor girl!" he said. "Poor girl! The ways of Fate are indeed hard to understand. If there is not some compensation hereafter, then the world is a cruel jest.
But a woman's love is not so easily set aside. He had left me under the beast's claws, he had deserted me in my need, and yet I could not bring myself to give him to the gallows.
For myself, I cared nothing what became of me. What could be more dreadful than my actual life? But I stood between Leonardo and his fate.
And what did he do with this five-clawed club, which is the most singular and ingenious part of all your story?
I cannot tell, Mr. Holmes. There is a chalk-pit by the camp, with a deep green pool at the base of it.
We had risen to go, but there was something in the woman's voice which arrested Holmes's attention. He turned swiftly upon her.
How can you tell? The example of patient suffering is in itself the most precious of all lessons to an impatient world.
Two days later, when I called upon my friend, he pointed with some pride to a small blue bottle upon his mantelpiece.
Exactly. It came by post. 'I send you my temptation. I will follow your advice.' That was the message.
Sherlock Holmes had been bending for a long time over a low-power microscope. Now he straightened himself up and looked round at me in triumph.
"It is glue, Watson," said he. "Unquestionably it is glue. Have a look at these scattered objects in the field!"
Those hairs are threads from a tweed coat. The irregular grey masses are dust. There are epithelial scales on the left.
"It is a very fine demonstration," he answered. "In the St. Pancras case you may remember that a cap was found beside the dead policeman.
He looked impatiently at his watch. "I had a new client calling, but he is overdue. By the way, Watson, you know something of racing?"
Then I'll make you my 'Handy Guide to the Turf.' What about Sir Robert Norberton? Does the name recall anything?
Well, I should say so. He lives at Shoscombe Old Place, and I know it well, for my summer quarters were down there once.
It was when he horsewhipped Sam Brewer, the well-known Curzon Street moneylender, on Newmarket Heath.
Well, he has the name of being a dangerous man. He is about the most daredevil rider in England--second in the Grand National a few years back.
He is one of those men who have overshot their true generation. He should have been a buck in the days of the Regency--a boxer, an athlete, a plunger on the Turf, a lover of fair ladies, and, by all account, so far down Queer Street that he may never find his way back again.
Capital, Watson! A thumb-nail sketch. I seem to know the man. Now, can you give me some idea of Shoscombe Old Place?
Only that it is in the centre of Shoscombe Park, and that the famous Shoscombe stud and training quarters are to be found there.
"And the head trainer," said Holmes, "is John Mason. You need not look surprised at my knowledge, Watson, for this is a letter from him which I am unfolding.
"There are the Shoscombe spaniels," said I. "You hear of them at every dog show. The most exclusive breed in England.
Sir Robert has never married. Just as well, I think, considering his prospects. He lives with his widowed sister, Lady Beatrice Falder.
No, no. The place belonged to her late husband, Sir James. Norberton has no claim on it at all. It is only a life interest and reverts to her husband's brother.
That is about the size of it. He is a devil of a fellow and must lead her a most uneasy life. Yet I have heard that she is devoted to him.
The door had opened and the page had shown in a tall, clean-shaven man with the firm, austere expression which is only seen upon those who have to control horses or boys.
Mr. John Mason had many of both under his sway, and he looked equal to the task. He bowed with cold self-possession and seated himself upon the chair to which Holmes had waved him.
It was too delicate a thing for me to put the details on paper. And too complicated. It was only face to face I could do it.
Holmes raised his eyebrows. "This is Baker Street, not Harley Street," said he. "But why do you say so?"
Well, sir, when a man does one queer thing, or two queer things, there may be a meaning to it, but when everything he does is queer, then you begin to wonder.
The best in England, Mr. Holmes. I should know, if anyone does. Now, I'll be plain with you, for I know you are gentlemen of honour and that it won't go beyond the room.
Sir Robert has got to win this Derby. He's up to the neck, and it's his last chance. Everything he could raise or borrow is on the horse--and at fine odds, too!
The public don't know how good he is. Sir Robert has been too clever for the touts. He has the Prince's half-brother out for spins.
You can't tell 'em apart. But there are two lengths in a furlong between them when it comes to a gallop.
He thinks of nothing but the horse and the race. His whole life is on it. He's holding off the Jews till then.
Well, first of all, you have only to look at him. I don't believe he sleeps at night. He is down at the stables at all hours.
His eyes are wild. It has all been too much for his nerves. Then there is his conduct to Lady Beatrice!
They have always been the best of friends. They had the same tastes, the two of them, and she loved the horses as much as he did.
Well, she seems to have lost all interest in the horses. For a week now she has driven past the stables with never so much as 'good morning'!
And a bitter, savage, spiteful quarrel at that. Why else would he give away her pet spaniel that she loved as if he were her child?
He gave it a few days ago to old Barnes, what keeps the 'Green Dragon,' three miles off, at Crendall.
Of course, with her weak heart and dropsy one couldn't expect that she could get about with him, but he spent two hours every evening in her room.
He might well do what he could, for she has been a rare good friend to him. But that's all over, too.
He never goes near her. And she takes it to heart. She is brooding and sulky and drinking, Mr. Holmes--drinking like a fish.
Well, she took her glass, but now it is often a whole bottle of an evening. So Stephens, the butler, told me.
It's all changed, Mr. Holmes, and there is something damned rotten about it. But then, again, what is master doing down at the old church crypt at night?
It was the butler who saw him go. Twelve o'clock at night and raining hard. So next night I was up at the house and, sure enough, master was off again.
Stephens and I went after him, but it was jumpy work, for it would have been a bad job if he had seen us.
He's a terrible man with his fists if he gets started, and no respecter of persons. So we were shy of getting too near, but we marked him down all right.
Well, sir, there is an old ruined chapel in the park. It is so old that nobody could fix its date. And under it there's a crypt which has a bad name among us.
It's a dark, damp, lonely place by day, but there are few in that county that would have the nerve to go near it at night.
But master's not afraid. He never feared anything in his life. But what is he doing there in the night-time?
"Wait a bit!" said Holmes. "You say there is another man there. It must be one of your own stable-men, or someone from the house!
'Hullo, mate! who may you be?' says I. I guess he had not heard us coming, so he looked over his shoulder with a face as if he had seen the Devil coming out of Hell.
He let out a yell, and away he went as hard as he could lick it in the darkness. He could run!--I'll give him that.
Yes, I would swear to his yellow face--a mean dog, I should say. What could he have in common with Sir Robert?
I quite understand, Mr. Mason. Of course, the situation is clear enough. From Dr. Watson's description of Sir Robert I can realize that no woman is safe from him.
But she may not have seen it before. Let us suppose that she has suddenly found it out. She wants to get rid of the woman.
Her brother will not permit it. The invalid, with her weak heart and inability to get about, has no means of enforcing her will.
The hated maid is still tied to her. The lady refuses to speak, sulks, takes to drink. Sir Robert in his anger takes her pet spaniel away from her.
Exactly! As far as it goes. How would all that bear upon the visits by night to the old crypt? We can't fit that into our plot.
No, sir, and there is something more that I can't fit in. Why should Sir Robert want to dig up a dead body?
We only found it out yesterday--after I had written to you. Yesterday Sir Robert had gone to London, so Stephens and I went down to the crypt.
Well, sir, I think it would hardly interest them. It was just the head and a few bones of a mummy. It may have been a thousand years old.
But it wasn't there before. That I'll swear, and so will Stephens. It had been stowed away in a corner and covered over with a board, but that corner had always been empty before.
It was just a week ago to-day. The creature was howling outside the old well-house, and Sir Robert was in one of his tantrums that morning.
He caught it up and I thought he would have killed it. Then he gave it to Sandy Bain, the jockey, and told him to take the dog to old Barnes at the 'Green Dragon,' for he never wished to see it again.
"I am not clear yet what you want me to do in this matter, Mr. Mason," he said at last. "Can't you make it more definite?"
There is a central heating furnace in the cellar under Lady Beatrice's room. It's been off for some time, but Sir Robert complained of cold and had it on again.
Harvey runs it--he's one of my lads. This very morning he came to me with this which he found raking out the cinders.
There is one door from outside. There is another which leads up by a stair to the passage in which Lady Beatrice's room is situated.
These are deep waters, Mr. Mason; deep and rather dirty. You say that Sir Robert was not at home last night?
The honest trainer showed very clearly upon his face that he was convinced that yet another lunatic had come into his harassed life.
That's good enough. Watson and I are famous fishermen--are we not, Watson? You may address us in future at the 'Green Dragon.'
We should reach it to-night. I need not say that we don't want to see you, Mr. Mason, but a note will reach us, and no doubt I could find you if I want you.
Thus it was that on a bright May evening Holmes and I found ourselves alone in a first-class carriage and bound for the little "halt-on-demand" station of Shoscombe.
The rack above us was covered with a formidable litter of rods, reels and baskets. On reaching our destination a short drive took us to an old-fashioned tavern, where a sporting host, Josiah Barnes, entered eagerly into our plans for the extirpation of the fish of the neighbourhood.
It's Sir Robert, sir. He's terrible jealous of touts. If you two strangers were as near his training quarters as that he'd be after you as sure as fate.
Yes, and a good colt, too. He carries all our money for the race, and all Sir Robert's into the bargain.
Well, you are in the right place for that. There is a deal of it lying about. But mind what I have told you about Sir Robert.
Surely, Mr. Barnes! We certainly shall. By the way, that was a most beautiful spaniel that was whining in the hall.
"I am a dog-fancier myself," said Holmes. "Now, if it is a fair question, what would a prize dog like that cost?"
More than I could pay, sir. It was Sir Robert himself who gave me this one. That's why I have to keep it on a lead.
"We are getting some cards in our hand, Watson," said Holmes, when the landlord had left us. "It's not an easy one to play, but we may see our way in a day or two.
By the way Sir Robert is still in London, I hear. We might, perhaps, enter the sacred domain to-night without fear of bodily assault.
Let us consider our data. The brother no longer visits the beloved invalid sister. He gives away her favourite dog.
Well, it might be so. Or--well, there is an alternative. Now to continue our review of the situation from the time that the quarrel, if there is a quarrel, began.
The lady keeps her room, alters her habits, is not seen save when she drives out with her maid, refuses to stop at the stables to greet her favourite horse, and apparently takes to drink.
That is another line of thought. There are two, and I beg you will not tangle them. Line A, which concerns Lady Beatrice, has a vaguely sinister flavour, has it not?
He is a daring and desperate man. He derives his income from his sister. His sister's maid is his willing tool.
Ah, yes, the crypt! Let us suppose, Watson--it is merely a scandalous supposition, a hypothesis put forward for argument's sake--that Sir Robert has done away with his sister.
Very possibly, Watson. Sir Robert is a man of an honourable stock. But you do occasionally find a carrion crow among the eagles.
Therefore, he has still to stand his ground. To do this he would have to dispose of the body of his victim, and he would also have to find a substitute who would impersonate her.
I think that there is a small experiment which we may try to-morrow, Watson, in order to throw some light on the matter.
In the morning Holmes discovered that we had come without our spoon-bait for jack, which absolved us from fishing for the day.
"This is the place," said he, as we came to two high park gates with heraldic griffins towering above them.
About midday, Mr. Barnes informs me, the old lady takes a drive, and the carriage must slow down while the gates are opened.
When it comes through, and before it gathers speed, I want you, Watson, to stop the coachman with some question.
It was not a long vigil. Within a quarter of an hour we saw the big open yellow barouche coming down the long avenue, with two splendid, high-stepping grey carriage horses in the shafts.
Holmes crouched behind his bush with the dog. I stood unconcernedly swinging a cane in the roadway. A keeper ran out and the gates swung open.
The carriage had slowed to a walk and I was able to get a good look at the occupants. A highly-coloured young woman with flaxen hair and impudent eyes sat on the left.
At her right was an elderly person with rounded back and a huddle of shawls about her face and shoulders which proclaimed the invalid.
When the horses reached the high road I held up my hand with an authoritative gesture, and as the coachman pulled up I inquired if Sir Robert was at Shoscombe Old Place.
At the same moment Holmes stepped out and released the spaniel. With a joyous cry it dashed forward to the carriage and sprang upon the step.
Then in a moment its eager greeting changed to furious rage, and it snapped at the black skirt above it.
"Drive on! Drive on!" shrieked a harsh voice. The coachman lashed the horses, and we were left standing in the roadway.
"Well, Watson, that's done it," said Holmes, as he fastened the lead to the neck of the excited spaniel.
My companion seemed to have no further plans for the day, and we did actually use our fishing tackle in the mill-stream, with the result that we had a dish of trout for our supper.
It was only after that meal that Holmes showed signs of renewed activity. Once more we found ourselves upon the same road as in the morning, which led us to the park gates.
A tall, dark figure was awaiting us there, who proved to be our London acquaintance, Mr. John Mason, the trainer.
"Good evening, gentlemen," said he. "I got your note, Mr. Holmes. Sir Robert has not returned yet, but I hear that he is expected to-night."
I can't afford to do that, Mr. Holmes. The moment he arrives he will want to see me to get the last news of Shoscombe Prince.
I see! In that case we must work without you, Mr. Mason. You can show us the crypt and then leave us.
It was pitch-dark and without a moon, but Mason led us over the grass-lands until a dark mass loomed up in front of us which proved to be the ancient chapel.
We entered the broken gap which was once the porch and our guide, stumbling among heaps of loose masonry, picked his way to the corner of the building, where a steep stair led down into the crypt.
Holmes had lit his lantern, which shot a tiny tunnel of vivid yellow light upon the mournful scene. Its rays were reflected back from the coffin-plates, many of them adorned with the griffin and coronet of this old family which carried its honours even to the gate of Death.
"They are here in this corner." The trainer strode across and then stood in silent surprise as our light was turned upon the place.
"So I expected," said Holmes, chuckling. "I fancy the ashes of them might even now be found in that oven which had already consumed a part."
But why in the world would anyone want to burn the bones of a man who has been dead a thousand years?
"That is what we are here to find out," said Holmes. "It may mean a long search, and we need not detain you.
It was an hour or more before Holmes came to a leaden coffin standing on end before the entrance to the vault.
I heard his little cry of satisfaction, and was aware from his hurried but purposeful movements that he had reached a goal.
There was a rending, tearing sound as it gave way, but it had hardly hinged back and partly revealed the contents before we had an unforeseen interruption.
Someone was walking in the chapel above. It was the firm, rapid step of one who came with a definite purpose and knew well the ground upon which he walked.
A light streamed down the stairs, and an instant later the man who bore it was framed in the Gothic archway.
He was a terrible figure, huge in stature and fierce in manner. A large stable-lantern which he held in front of him shone upwards upon a strong, heavily-moustached face and angry eyes, which glared round him into every recess of the vault, finally fixing themselves with a deadly stare upon my companion and myself.
"Who the devil are you?" he thundered. "And what are you doing upon my property?" Then, as Holmes returned no answer, he took a couple of steps forward and raised a heavy stick which he carried.
"I also have a question to ask you, Sir Robert," he said in his sternest tone. "Who is this? And what is it doing here?"
He turned and tore open the coffin-lid behind him. In the glare of the lantern I saw a body swathed in a sheet from head to foot, with dreadful, witch-like features, all nose and chin, projecting at one end, the dim, glazed eyes staring from a discoloured and crumbling face.
"How came you to know of this?" he cried. And then, with some return of his truculent manner: "What business is it of yours?"
"My name is Sherlock Holmes," said my companion. "Possibly it is familiar to you. In any case, my business is that of every other good citizen--to uphold the law.
"'Fore God, Mr. Holmes, it's all right," said he. "Appearances are against me, I'll admit, but I could act no otherwise."
Well, if it must be, it must. Come up to the house and you can judge for yourself how the matter stands.
Quarter of an hour later we found ourselves in what I judge, from the lines of polished barrels behind glass covers, to be the gun-room of the old house.
These two wore an appearance of utter bewilderment, which showed that the Baronet had not yet had time to explain to them the turn events had taken.
"There," said Sir Robert, with a wave of his hand, "are Mr. and Mrs. Norlett. Mrs. Norlett, under her maiden name of Evans, has for some years been my sister's confidential maid.
I have brought them here because I feel that my best course is to explain the true position to you, and they are the two people upon earth who can substantiate what I say.
I am dependent upon my sister, Lady Beatrice, for everything. But it is well known that her interest in the estate is for her own life only.
For myself, I am deeply in the hands of the Jews. I have always known that if my sister were to die my creditors would be on to my estate like a flock of vultures.
Everything would be seized; my stables, my horses--everything. Well, Mr. Holmes, my sister did die just a week ago.
What could I do? Absolute ruin faced me. If I could stave things off for three weeks all would be well.
Her maid's husband--this man here--is an actor. It came into our heads--it came into my head--that he could for that short period personate my sister.
It was but a case of appearing daily in the carriage, for no one need enter her room save the maid. It was not difficult to arrange.
The body could not remain there. On the first night Norlett and I carried it out to the old well-house, which is now never used.
We were followed, however, by her pet spaniel, which yapped continually at the door, so I felt some safer place was needed.
I got rid of the spaniel and we carried the body to the crypt of the church. There was no indignity or irreverence, Mr. Holmes.
The Baronet shook his head impatiently. "It is easy to preach," said he. "Perhaps you would have felt differently if you had been in my position.
One cannot see all one's hopes and all one's plans shattered at the last moment and make no effort to save them.
It seemed to me that it would be no unworthy resting-place if we put her for the time in one of the coffins of her husband's ancestors lying in what is still consecrated ground.
We opened such a coffin, removed the contents, and placed her as you have seen her. As to the old relics which we took out, we could not leave them on the floor of the crypt.
Norlett and I removed them, and he descended at night and burned them in the central furnace. There is my story, Mr. Holmes, though how you forced my hand so that I have to tell it is more than I can say.
"There is one flaw in your narrative, Sir Robert," he said at last. "Your bets on the race, and therefore your hopes for the future, would hold good even if your creditors seized your estate."
The horse would be part of the estate. What do they care for my bets? As likely as not they would not run him at all.
My chief creditor is, unhappily, my most bitter enemy--a rascally fellow, Sam Brewer, whom I was once compelled to horsewhip on Newmarket Heath.
"Well, Sir Robert," said Holmes, rising, "this matter must, of course, be referred to the police. It was my duty to bring the facts to light and there I must leave it.
As to the morality or decency of your own conduct, it is not for me to express an opinion. It is nearly midnight, Watson, and I think we may make our way back to our humble abode.
It is generally known now that this singular episode ended upon a happier note than Sir Robert's actions deserved.
Both police and coroner took a lenient view of the transaction, and beyond a mild censure for the delay in registering the lady's decease, the lucky owner got away scatheless from this strange incident in a career which has now outlived its shadows and promises to end in an honoured old age.
Sherlock Holmes was in a melancholy and philosophic mood that morning. His alert practical nature was subject to such reactions.
Exactly, Watson. Pathetic and futile. But is not all life pathetic and futile? Is not his story a microcosm of the whole?
We reach. We grasp. And what is left in our hands at the end? A shadow. Or worse than a shadow--misery.
Well, I suppose I may call him so. He has been sent on by the Yard. Just as medical men occasionally send their incurables to a quack.
They argue that they can do nothing more, and that whatever happens the patient can be no worse than he is.
Holmes took a rather soiled card from the table. "Josiah Amberley. He says he was junior partner of Brickfall and Amberley, who are manufacturers of artistic materials.
Retired in 1896, Watson. Early in 1897 he married a woman twenty years younger than himself--a good-looking woman, too, if the photograph does not flatter.
A competence, a wife, leisure--it seemed a straight road which lay before him. And yet within two years he is, as you have seen, as broken and miserable a creature as crawls beneath the sun.
The old story, Watson. A treacherous friend and a fickle wife. It would appear that Amberley has one hobby in life, and it is chess.
Not far from him at Lewisham there lives a young doctor who is also a chess-player. I have noted his name as Dr. Ray Ernest.
Can we find the lady? Can we save the money? A commonplace problem so far as it has developed, and yet a vital one for Josiah Amberley.
Well, the immediate question, my dear Watson, happens to be, What will you do?--if you will be good enough to understudy me.
You know that I am preoccupied with this case of the two Coptic Patriarchs, which should come to a head to-day.
I really have not time to go out to Lewisham, and yet evidence taken on the spot has a special value.
The old fellow was quite insistent that I should go, but I explained my difficulty. He is prepared to meet a representative.
"By all means," I answered. "I confess I don't see that I can be of much service, but I am willing to do my best."
And so it was that on a summer afternoon I set forth to Lewisham, little dreaming that within a week the affair in which I was engaging would be the eager debate of all England.
It was late that evening before I returned to Baker Street and gave an account of my mission. Holmes lay with his gaunt figure stretched in his deep chair, his pipe curling forth slow wreaths of acrid tobacco, while his eyelids drooped over his eyes so lazily that he might almost have been asleep were it not that at any halt or questionable passage of my narrative they half lifted, and two grey eyes, as bright and keen as rapiers, transfixed me with their searching glance.
"The Haven is the name of Mr. Josiah Amberley's house," I explained. "I think it would interest you, Holmes.
It is like some penurious patrician who has sunk into the company of his inferiors. You know that particular quarter, the monotonous brick streets, the weary suburban highways.
Right in the middle of them, a little island of ancient culture and comfort, lies this old home, surrounded by a high sun-baked wall mottled with lichens and topped with moss, the sort of wall----
I had hardly entered the gateway before I saw Mr. Amberley coming down the drive. I only had a glimpse of him this morning, and he certainly gave me the impression of a strange creature, but when I saw him in full light his appearance was even more abnormal.
"I have, of course, studied it, and yet I should be interested to have your impression," said Holmes.
He seemed to me like a man who was literally bowed down by care. His back was curved as though he carried a heavy burden.
Yet he was not the weakling that I had at first imagined, for his shoulders and chest have the framework of a giant, though his figure tapers away into a pair of spindled legs.
I was struck by the snaky locks of grizzled hair which curled from under his old straw hat, and his face with its fierce, eager expression and the deeply-lined features.
That was the burden of his song for an hour or more. He had, it seems, no suspicion of an intrigue. They lived alone save for a woman who comes in by the day and leaves every evening at six.
On that particular evening old Amberley, wishing to give his wife a treat, had taken two upper circle seats at the Haymarket Theatre.
At the last moment she had complained of a headache and had refused to go. He had gone alone. There seemed to be no doubt about the fact, for he produced the unused ticket which he had taken for his wife.
"That is remarkable--most remarkable," said Holmes, whose interest in the case seemed to be rising. "Pray continue, Watson.
I find your narrative most arresting. Did you personally examine this ticket? You did not, perchance, take the number?
"It so happens that I did," I answered with some pride. "It chanced to be my old school number, thirty-one, and so it stuck in my head."
He showed me his strong-room, as he called it. It really is a strong-room--like a bank--with iron door and shutter--burglar-proof, as he claimed.
However, the woman seems to have had a duplicate key, and between them they had carried off some seven thousand pounds' worth of cash and securities.
There was no letter or message, nor has he heard a word since. He at once gave the alarm to the police.
Well, he was painting the passage. But he had already painted the door and woodwork of this room I spoke of.
'One must do something to ease an aching heart.' That was his own explanation. It was eccentric, no doubt, but he is clearly an eccentric man.
He tore up one of his wife's photographs in my presence--tore it up furiously in a tempest of passion.
You know that I have a quick eye for faces, Holmes. It was undoubtedly the tall, dark man whom I had addressed in the street.
I saw him once more at London Bridge, and then I lost him in the crowd. But I am convinced that he was following me.
"No doubt! No doubt!" said Holmes. "A tall, dark, heavily-moustached man, you say, with grey-tinted sun-glasses?"
It is true that though in your mission you have missed everything of importance, yet even those things which have obtruded themselves upon your notice give rise to serious thought.
Don't be hurt, my dear fellow. You know that I am quite impersonal. No one else would have done better.
Some possibly not so well. But clearly you have missed some vital points. What is the opinion of the neighbours about this man Amberley and his wife?
That surely is of importance. What of Dr. Ernest? Was he the gay Lothario one would expect? With your natural advantages, Watson, every lady is your helper and accomplice.
What about the girl at the post office, or the wife of the greengrocer? I can picture you whispering soft nothings with the young lady at the 'Blue Anchor,' and receiving hard somethings in exchange.
It has been done. Thanks to the telephone and the help of the Yard, I can usually get my essentials without leaving this room.
As a matter of fact, my information confirms the man's story. He has the local repute of being a miser as well as a harsh and exacting husband.
That he had a large sum of money in that strong-room of his is certain. So also is it that young Dr. Ernest, an unmarried man, played chess with Amberley, and probably played the fool with his wife.
All this seems plain sailing, and one would think that there was no more to be said--and yet!--and yet!
In my imagination, perhaps. Well, leave it there, Watson. Let us escape from this weary workaday world by the side door of music.
In the morning I was up betimes, but some toast crumbs and two empty egg-shells told me that my companion was earlier still.
There are one or two points of contact which I should wish to establish with Mr. Josiah Amberley. When I have done so we can dismiss the case--or not.
I would only ask you to be on hand about three o'clock, as I conceive it possible that I may want you.
I saw nothing of Holmes all day, but at the hour named he returned, grave, preoccupied and aloof. At such times it was wiser to leave him to himself.
He was not disappointed, for presently the old fellow arrived with a very worried and puzzled expression upon his austere face.
"I've had a telegram, Mr. Holmes. I can make nothing of it." He handed it over, and Holmes read it aloud.
"Dispatched at two-ten from Little Turlington," said Holmes. "Little Turlington is in Essex, I believe, not far from Frinton.
Well, of course you will start at once. This is evidently from a responsible person, the vicar of the place.
Where is my Crockford? Yes, here we have him. J. C. Elman, M.A., Living of Mossmoor cum Little Purlington.
Excellent. You had best go with him, Watson. He may need help or advice. Clearly we have come to a crisis in this affair.
"It's perfectly absurd, Mr. Holmes," he said. "What can this man possibly know of what has occurred? It is waste of time and money."
It would make the worst possible impression both on the police and upon myself, Mr. Amberley, if when so obvious a clue arose you should refuse to follow it up.
"Why, of course I shall go if you look at it in that way," said he. "On the face of it, it seems absurd to suppose that this parson knows anything, but if you think----"
"Whatever you do, see that he really does go," said he. "Should he break away or return, get to the nearest telephone exchange and send the single word 'Bolted.'
When we at last reached the little station it was a two-mile drive before we came to the Vicarage, where a big, solemn, rather pompous clergyman received us in his study.
"If this is a joke, sir, it is a very questionable one," said the vicar angrily. "I have never heard of the gentleman you name, and I have not sent a wire to anyone."
"Perhaps there is some mistake," said I; "are there perhaps two vicarages? Here is the wire itself, signed Elman, and dated from the Vicarage."
There is only one vicarage, sir, and only one vicar, and this wire is a scandalous forgery, the origin of which shall certainly be investigated by the police.
So Mr. Amberley and I found ourselves on the roadside in what seemed to me to be the most primitive village in England.
We made for the telegraph office, but it was already closed. There was a telephone, however, at the little 'Railway Arms,' and by it I got into touch with Holmes, who shared in our amazement at the result of our journey.
"Most singular!" said the distant voice. "Most remarkable! I much fear, my dear Watson, that there is no return train to-night.
I have unwittingly condemned you to the horrors of a country inn. However, there is always Nature, Watson--Nature and Josiah Amberley--you can be in close commune with both.
Next morning, when we did at last arrive in London, it was hard to say which of us was in the worse humour.
"If they are not worth more than the last ones they are not of much use," said Amberley, with a malevolent scowl.
None the less, he kept me company. I had already warned Holmes by telegram of the hour of our arrival, but we found a message waiting that he was at Lewisham, and would expect us there.
That was a surprise, but an even greater one was to find that he was not alone in the sitting-room of our client.
A stern-looking, impassive man sat beside him, a dark man with grey-tinted glasses and a large Masonic pin projecting from his tie.
"This is my friend Mr. Barker," said Holmes. "He has been interesting himself also in your business, Mr. Josiah Amberley, though we have been working independently.
Mr. Amberley sat down heavily. He sensed impending danger. I read it in his straining eyes and his twitching features.
The man sprang to his feet with a hoarse scream. He clawed into the air with his bony hands. His mouth was open, and for the instant he looked like some horrible bird of prey.
In a flash we got a glimpse of the real Josiah Amberley, a misshapen demon with a soul as distorted as his body.
As he fell back into his chair he clapped his hand to his lips as if to stifle a cough. Holmes sprang at his throat like a tiger, and twisted his face towards the ground.
It is only a few hundred yards to the station. We will go together. You can stay here, Watson. I shall be back within half an hour.
The old colourman had the strength of a lion in that great trunk of his, but he was helpless in the hands of the two experienced man-handlers.
Wriggling and twisting he was dragged to the waiting cab, and I was left to my solitary vigil in the ill-omened house.
In less time than he had named, however, Holmes was back, in company with a smart young police inspector.
"I've left Barker to look after the formalities," said Holmes. "You had not met Barker, Watson. He is my hated rival upon the Surrey shore.
When you said a tall dark man it was not difficult for me to complete the picture. He has several good cases to his credit, has he not, Inspector?
His methods are irregular, no doubt, like my own. The irregulars are useful sometimes, you know. You, for example, with your compulsory warning about whatever he said being used against him, could never have bluffed this rascal into what is virtually a confession.
Perhaps not. But we get there all the same, Mr. Holmes. Don't imagine that we had not formed our own views of this case, and that we would not have laid our hands on our man.
You will excuse us for feeling sore when you jump in with methods which we cannot use, and so rob us of the credit.
There shall be no such robbery, MacKinnon. I assure you that I efface myself from now onwards, and as to Barker, he has done nothing save what I told him.
That is very handsome of you, Mr. Holmes. Praise or blame can matter little to you, but it is very different to us when the newspapers begin to ask questions.
Quite so. But they are pretty sure to ask questions anyhow, so it would be as well to have answers. What will you say, for example, when the intelligent and enterprising reporter asks you what the exact points were which aroused your suspicion, and finally gave you a certain conviction as to the real facts?
Then you will soon get the clearest fact of all. The bodies cannot be far away. Try the cellars and the garden.
It should not take long to dig up the likely places. This house is older than the water-pipes. There must be a disused well somewhere.
I'll show you first how it was done, and then I will give the explanation which is due to you, and even more to my long-suffering friend here, who has been invaluable throughout.
But, first, I would give you an insight into this man's mentality. It is a very unusual one--so much so that I think his destination is more likely to be Broadmoor than the scaffold.
He was a miserable miser who made his wife so wretched by his niggardly ways that she was a ready prey for any adventurer.
Such a one came upon the scene in the person of this chess-playing doctor. Amberley excelled at chess--one mark, Watson, of a scheming mind.
Like all misers, he was a jealous man, and his jealousy became a frantic mania. Rightly or wrongly, he suspected an intrigue.
Holmes led us along the passage with as much certainty as if he had lived in the house, and halted at the open door of the strong-room.
"That was our first clue," said Holmes. "You can thank Dr. Watson's observation for that, though he failed to draw the inference.
It set my foot upon the trail. Why should this man at such a time be filling his house with strong odours?
Obviously, to cover some other smell which he wished to conceal--some guilty smell which would suggest suspicions.
Then came the idea of a room such as you see here with iron door and shutter--a hermetically sealed room.
Put those two facts together, and whither do they lead? I could only determine that by examining the house myself.
Therefore, Amberley had not been to the theatre, and his alibi fell to the ground. He made a bad slip when he allowed my astute friend to notice the number of the seat taken for his wife.
To prevent any miscarriage, Dr. Watson accompanied him. The good vicar's name I took, of course, out of my Crockford.
Observe what I found. You see the gas-pipe along the skirting here. Very good. It rises in the angle of the wall, and there is a tap here in the corner.
The pipe runs out into the strong-room, as you can see, and ends in that plaster rose in the centre of the ceiling, where it is concealed by the ornamentation.
By what devilish device he decoyed them there I do not know, but once inside the door they were at his mercy.
He had begun the work of painting the day before, according to his story. But what next, Mr. Holmes?
When I could twist my head round I looked into the tinted spectacles of my friend and rival, Mr. Barker.
It was a curious forgathering, and set us both smiling. It seems that he had been engaged by Dr. Ray Ernest's family to make some investigations, and had come to the same conclusion as to foul play.
He had watched the house for some days, and had spotted Dr. Watson as one of the obviously suspicious characters who had called there.
He could hardly arrest Watson, but when he saw a man actually climbing out of the pantry window there came a limit to his restraint.
Because it was in my mind to put that little test which answered so admirably. I fear you would not have gone so far.
Well, maybe not. I understand that I have your word, Mr. Holmes, that you step right out of the case now and that you turn all your results over to us.
Well, in the name of the Force I thank you. It seems a clear case, as you put it, and there can't be much difficulty over the bodies.
"I'll show you a grim little bit of evidence," said Holmes, "and I am sure Amberley himself never observed it.
You'll get results, Inspector, by always putting yourself in the other fellow's place, and thinking what you would do yourself.
Exactly. You would like to tell people how you died. No use writing on paper. That would be seen. If you wrote on the wall some eye might rest upon it.
Now, look here! Just above the skirting is scribbled with a purple indelible pencil: 'We we----' That's all.
Well, it's only a foot above the ground. The poor devil was on the floor and dying when he wrote it. He lost his senses before he could finish.
We'll look out for it, you may be sure. But those securities? Clearly there was no robbery at all. And yet he did possess those bonds.
You may be sure he has them hidden in a safe place. When the whole elopement had passed into history he would suddenly discover them, and announce that the guilty couple had relented and sent back the plunder or had dropped it on the way.
"You certainly seem to have met every difficulty," said the Inspector. "Of course, he was bound to call us in, but why he should have gone to you I can't understand."
"Pure swank!" Holmes answered. "He felt so clever and so sure of himself that he imagined no one could touch him.
He could say to any suspicious neighbour, 'Look at the steps I have taken. I have consulted not only the police, but even Sherlock Holmes.'
"We must forgive you your 'even,' Mr. Holmes," said he; "it's as workmanlike a job as I can remember."
A couple of days later my friend tossed across to me a copy of the bi-weekly _North Surrey Observer_.
The remarkable acumen by which Inspector MacKinnon deduced from the smell of paint that some other smell, that of gas, for example, might be concealed; the bold deduction that the strongroom might also be the death-chamber, and the subsequent inquiry which led to the discovery of the bodies in a disused well, cleverly concealed by a dog-kennel, should live in the history of crime as a standing example of the intelligence of our professional detectives.
"Well, well, MacKinnon is a good fellow," said Holmes, with a tolerant smile. "You can file it in our archives, Watson.
THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES. THE MEMOIRS OF SHERLOCK HOLMES. THE RETURN OF SHERLOCK HOLMES. MICAH CLARKE.
THE CAPTAIN OF THE POLE STAR. THE SIGN OF FOUR. THE WHITE COMPANY THE REFUGEES. THE STARK MUNRO LETTERS.
THE EXPLOITS OF BRIGADIER GERARD. RODNEY STONE. UNCLE BERNAC. THE TRAGEDY OF THE "KOROSKO." A DUET, WITH AN OCCASIONAL CHORUS.
THE GREEN FLAG. THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES. THE ADVENTURES OF GERARD. SIR NIGEL. THROUGH THE MAGIC DOOR.
ROUND THE FIRE STORIES. THE LAST GALLEY. THE LOST WORLD. ROUND THE RED LAMP. THE VALLEY OF FEAR. HIS LAST BOW.
DANGER! AND OTHER STORIES. THE FIRM OF GIRDLESTONE. TALES OF ADVENTURE AND MEDICAL LIFE. TALES OF LONG AGO.
TALES OF PIRATES AND BLUE WATER. TALES OF THE RING AND CAMP. TALES OF TERROR AND MYSTERY. TALES OF TWILIGHT AND THE UNSEEN.
SONGS OF ACTION. SONGS OF THE ROAD. THE GUARDS CAME THROUGH, AND OTHER POEMS. POEMS: COLLECTED EDITION.
Chapter 1--Mr. Sherlock Holmes Chapter 2--The Curse of the Baskervilles Chapter 3--The Problem Chapter 4--Sir Henry Baskerville Chapter 5--Three Broken Threads Chapter 6--Baskerville Hall Chapter 7--The Stapletons of Merripit House Chapter 8--First Report of Dr. Watson Chapter 9--The Light Upon The Moor Chapter 10--Extract from the Diary of Dr. Watson Chapter 11--The Man on the Tor Chapter 12--Death on the Moor Chapter 13--Fixing the Nets Chapter 14--The Hound of the Baskervilles Chapter 15--A Retrospection
Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who was usually very late in the mornings, save upon those not infrequent occasions when he was up all night, was seated at the breakfast table.
I stood upon the hearth-rug and picked up the stick which our visitor had left behind him the night before.
It was a fine, thick piece of wood, bulbous-headed, of the sort which is known as a "Penang lawyer." Just under the head was a broad silver band nearly an inch across.
"To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of the C.C.H.," was engraved upon it, with the date "1884."
It was just such a stick as the old-fashioned family practitioner used to carry--dignified, solid, and reassuring.
"I have, at least, a well-polished, silver-plated coffee-pot in front of me," said he. "But, tell me, Watson, what do you make of our visitor's stick?
Since we have been so unfortunate as to miss him and have no notion of his errand, this accidental souvenir becomes of importance.
"I think," said I, following as far as I could the methods of my companion, "that Dr. Mortimer is a successful, elderly medical man, well-esteemed since those who know him give him this mark of their appreciation."
I think also that the probability is in favour of his being a country practitioner who does a great deal of his visiting on foot.
Because this stick, though originally a very handsome one has been so knocked about that I can hardly imagine a town practitioner carrying it.
The thick-iron ferrule is worn down, so it is evident that he has done a great amount of walking with it.
And then again, there is the 'friends of the C.C.H.' I should guess that to be the Something Hunt, the local hunt to whose members he has possibly given some surgical assistance, and which has made him a small presentation in return.
It may be that you are not yourself luminous, but you are a conductor of light. Some people without possessing genius have a remarkable power of stimulating it.
I was proud, too, to think that I had so far mastered his system as to apply it in a way which earned his approval.
He now took the stick from my hands and examined it for a few minutes with his naked eyes. Then with an expression of interest he laid down his cigarette, and carrying the cane to the window, he looked over it again with a convex lens.
"Interesting, though elementary," said he as he returned to his favourite corner of the settee. "There are certainly one or two indications upon the stick.
"Has anything escaped me?" I asked with some self-importance. "I trust that there is nothing of consequence which I have overlooked?"
Not that you are entirely wrong in this instance. The man is certainly a country practitioner. And he walks a good deal.
The probability lies in that direction. And if we take this as a working hypothesis we have a fresh basis from which to start our construction of this unknown visitor.
Well, then, supposing that 'C.C.H.' does stand for 'Charing Cross Hospital,' what further inferences may we draw?
I can only think of the obvious conclusion that the man has practised in town before going to the country.
I think that we might venture a little farther than this. Look at it in this light. On what occasion would it be most probable that such a presentation would be made?
When would his friends unite to give him a pledge of their good will? Obviously at the moment when Dr. Mortimer withdrew from the service of the hospital in order to start in practice for himself.
We know there has been a presentation. We believe there has been a change from a town hospital to a country practice.
Is it, then, stretching our inference too far to say that the presentation was on the occasion of the change?
What was he, then? If he was in the hospital and yet not on the staff he could only have been a house-surgeon or a house-physician--little more than a senior student.
And he left five years ago--the date is on the stick. So your grave, middle-aged family practitioner vanishes into thin air, my dear Watson, and there emerges a young fellow under thirty, amiable, unambitious, absent-minded, and the possessor of a favourite dog, which I should describe roughly as being larger than a terrier and smaller than a mastiff.
I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his settee and blew little wavering rings of smoke up to the ceiling.
"As to the latter part, I have no means of checking you," said I, "but at least it is not difficult to find out a few particulars about the man's age and professional career."
From my small medical shelf I took down the Medical Directory and turned up the name. There were several Mortimers, but only one who could be our visitor.
Mortimer, James, M.R.C.S., 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor, Devon. House-surgeon, from 1882 to 1884, at Charing Cross Hospital.
Winner of the Jackson prize for Comparative Pathology, with essay entitled 'Is Disease a Reversion?' Corresponding member of the Swedish Pathological Society.
Author of 'Some Freaks of Atavism' (Lancet 1882). 'Do We Progress?' (Journal of Psychology, March, 1883).
"No mention of that local hunt, Watson," said Holmes with a mischievous smile, "but a country doctor, as you very astutely observed.
I think that I am fairly justified in my inferences. As to the adjectives, I said, if I remember right, amiable, unambitious, and absent-minded.
It is my experience that it is only an amiable man in this world who receives testimonials, only an unambitious one who abandons a London career for the country, and only an absent-minded one who leaves his stick and not his visiting-card after waiting an hour in your room.
Has been in the habit of carrying this stick behind his master. Being a heavy stick the dog has held it tightly by the middle, and the marks of his teeth are very plainly visible.
The dog's jaw, as shown in the space between these marks, is too broad in my opinion for a terrier and not broad enough for a mastiff.
He had risen and paced the room as he spoke. Now he halted in the recess of the window. There was such a ring of conviction in his voice that I glanced up in surprise.
For the very simple reason that I see the dog himself on our very door-step, and there is the ring of its owner.
Don't move, I beg you, Watson. He is a professional brother of yours, and your presence may be of assistance to me.
The appearance of our visitor was a surprise to me, since I had expected a typical country practitioner.
He was a very tall, thin man, with a long nose like a beak, which jutted out between two keen, gray eyes, set closely together and sparkling brightly from behind a pair of gold-rimmed glasses.
He was clad in a professional but rather slovenly fashion, for his frock-coat was dingy and his trousers frayed.
Though young, his long back was already bowed, and he walked with a forward thrust of his head and a general air of peering benevolence.
As he entered his eyes fell upon the stick in Holmes's hand, and he ran towards it with an exclamation of joy.
"I am so very glad," said he. "I was not sure whether I had left it here or in the Shipping Office. I would not lose that stick for the world."
Yes, sir. I married, and so left the hospital, and with it all hopes of a consulting practice. It was necessary to make a home of my own.
Glad to meet you, sir. I have heard your name mentioned in connection with that of your friend. You interest me very much, Mr. Holmes.
I had hardly expected so dolichocephalic a skull or such well-marked supra-orbital development. Would you have any objection to my running my finger along your parietal fissure?
A cast of your skull, sir, until the original is available, would be an ornament to any anthropological museum.
Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair. "You are an enthusiast in your line of thought, I perceive, sir, as I am in mine," said he.
I observe from your forefinger that you make your own cigarettes. Have no hesitation in lighting one.
The man drew out paper and tobacco and twirled the one up in the other with surprising dexterity. He had long, quivering fingers as agile and restless as the antennae of an insect.
Holmes was silent, but his little darting glances showed me the interest which he took in our curious companion.
"I presume, sir," said he at last, "that it was not merely for the purpose of examining my skull that you have done me the honour to call here last night and again to-day?"
I said, sir, to the precisely scientific mind. But as a practical man of affairs it is acknowledged that you stand alone.
"Just a little," said Holmes. "I think, Dr. Mortimer, you would do wisely if without more ado you would kindly tell me plainly what the exact nature of the problem is in which you demand my assistance."
You have presented an inch or two of it to my examination all the time that you have been talking. It would be a poor expert who could not give the date of a document within a decade or so.
I may say that I was his personal friend as well as his medical attendant. He was a strong-minded man, sir, shrewd, practical, and as unimaginative as I am myself.
Yet he took this document very seriously, and his mind was prepared for just such an end as did eventually overtake him.
You will observe, Watson, the alternative use of the long s and the short. It is one of several indications which enabled me to fix the date.
I looked over his shoulder at the yellow paper and the faded script. At the head was written: "Baskerville Hall," and below in large, scrawling figures: "1742."
Most modern. A most practical, pressing matter, which must be decided within twenty-four hours. But the manuscript is short and is intimately connected with the affair.
Holmes leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tips together, and closed his eyes, with an air of resignation.
Dr. Mortimer turned the manuscript to the light and read in a high, cracking voice the following curious, old-world narrative:--
When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singular narrative he pushed his spectacles up on his forehead and stared across at Mr. Sherlock Holmes.
Now, Mr. Holmes, we will give you something a little more recent. This is the Devon County Chronicle of May 14th of this year.
It is a short account of the facts elicited at the death of Sir Charles Baskerville which occurred a few days before that date.
My friend leaned a little forward and his expression became intent. Our visitor readjusted his glasses and began:--
The facts of the case are simple. Sir Charles Baskerville was in the habit every night before going to bed of walking down the famous Yew Alley of Baskerville Hall.
That night he went out as usual for his nocturnal walk, in the course of which he was in the habit of smoking a cigar.
He never returned. At twelve o'clock Barrymore, finding the hall door still open, became alarmed, and, lighting a lantern, went in search of his master.
The day had been wet, and Sir Charles's footmarks were easily traced down the Alley. Half-way down this walk there is a gate which leads out on to the moor.
There were indications that Sir Charles had stood for some little time here. He then proceeded down the Alley, and it was at the far end of it that his body was discovered.
One Murphy, a gipsy horse-dealer, was on the moor at no great distance at the time, but he appears by his own confession to have been the worse for drink.
This explanation was borne out by the post-mortem examination, which showed long-standing organic disease, and the coroner's jury returned a verdict in accordance with the medical evidence.
It is well that this is so, for it is obviously of the utmost importance that Sir Charles's heir should settle at the Hall and continue the good work which has been so sadly interrupted.
It is understood that the next of kin is Mr. Henry Baskerville, if he be still alive, the son of Sir Charles Baskerville's younger brother.
The young man when last heard of was in America, and inquiries are being instituted with a view to informing him of his good fortune.
"I must thank you," said Sherlock Holmes, "for calling my attention to a case which certainly presents some features of interest.
"Then let me have the private ones." He leaned back, put his finger-tips together, and assumed his most impassive and judicial expression.
Sir Charles lay on his face, his arms out, his fingers dug into the ground, and his features convulsed with some strong emotion to such an extent that I could hardly have sworn to his identity.
There was certainly no physical injury of any kind. But one false statement was made by Barrymore at the inquest.
He said that there were no traces upon the ground round the body. He did not observe any. But I did--some little distance off, but fresh and clear.
Dr. Mortimer looked strangely at us for an instant, and his voice sank almost to a whisper as he answered:--
I confess at these words a shudder passed through me. There was a thrill in the doctor's voice which showed that he was himself deeply moved by that which he told us.
Holmes leaned forward in his excitement and his eyes had the hard, dry glitter which shot from them when he was keenly interested.
The marks were some twenty yards from the body and no one gave them a thought. I don't suppose I should have done so had I not known this legend.
There are two lines of old yew hedge, twelve feet high and impenetrable. The walk in the centre is about eight feet across.
So that to reach the Yew Alley one either has to come down it from the house or else to enter it by the moor-gate?
Now, tell me, Dr. Mortimer--and this is important--the marks which you saw were on the path and not on the grass?
"If I had only been there!" he cried. "It is evidently a case of extraordinary interest, and one which presented immense opportunities to the scientific expert.
That gravel page upon which I might have read so much has been long ere this smudged by the rain and defaced by the clogs of curious peasants.
Oh, Dr. Mortimer, Dr. Mortimer, to think that you should not have called me in! You have indeed much to answer for.
I could not call you in, Mr. Holmes, without disclosing these facts to the world, and I have already given my reasons for not wishing to do so.
Since the tragedy, Mr. Holmes, there have come to my ears several incidents which are hard to reconcile with the settled order of Nature.
I assure you that there is a reign of terror in the district, and that it is a hardy man who will cross the moor at night.
"I have hitherto confined my investigations to this world," said he. "In a modest way I have combated evil, but to take on the Father of Evil himself would, perhaps, be too ambitious a task.
I see that you have quite gone over to the supernaturalists. But now, Dr. Mortimer, tell me this. If you hold these views, why have you come to consult me at all?
You tell me in the same breath that it is useless to investigate Sir Charles's death, and that you desire me to do it.
"By advising me as to what I should do with Sir Henry Baskerville, who arrives at Waterloo Station"--Dr. Mortimer looked at his watch--"in exactly one hour and a quarter."
Yes. On the death of Sir Charles we inquired for this young gentleman and found that he had been farming in Canada.
From the accounts which have reached us he is an excellent fellow in every way. I speak not as a medical man but as a trustee and executor of Sir Charles's will.
None. The only other kinsman whom we have been able to trace was Rodger Baskerville, the youngest of three brothers of whom poor Sir Charles was the elder.
The second brother, who died young, is the father of this lad Henry. The third, Rodger, was the black sheep of the family.
He came of the old masterful Baskerville strain, and was the very image, they tell me, of the family picture of old Hugo.
He made England too hot to hold him, fled to Central America, and died there in 1876 of yellow fever.
Henry is the last of the Baskervilles. In one hour and five minutes I meet him at Waterloo Station. I have had a wire that he arrived at Southampton this morning.
It seems natural, does it not? And yet, consider that every Baskerville who goes there meets with an evil fate.
I feel sure that if Sir Charles could have spoken with me before his death he would have warned me against bringing this, the last of the old race, and the heir to great wealth, to that deadly place.
And yet it cannot be denied that the prosperity of the whole poor, bleak country-side depends upon his presence.
All the good work which has been done by Sir Charles will crash to the ground if there is no tenant of the Hall.
I fear lest I should be swayed too much by my own obvious interest in the matter, and that is why I bring the case before you and ask for your advice.
"Put into plain words, the matter is this," said he. "In your opinion there is a diabolical agency which makes Dartmoor an unsafe abode for a Baskerville--that is your opinion?"
Exactly. But surely, if your supernatural theory be correct, it could work the young man evil in London as easily as in Devonshire.
You put the matter more flippantly, Mr. Holmes, than you would probably do if you were brought into personal contact with these things.
Your advice, then, as I understand it, is that the young man will be as safe in Devonshire as in London.
I recommend, sir, that you take a cab, call off your spaniel who is scratching at my front door, and proceed to Waterloo to meet Sir Henry Baskerville.
Twenty-four hours. At ten o'clock to-morrow, Dr. Mortimer, I will be much obliged to you if you will call upon me here, and it will be of help to me in my plans for the future if you will bring Sir Henry Baskerville with you.
"I will do so, Mr. Holmes." He scribbled the appointment on his shirtcuff and hurried off in his strange, peering, absent-minded fashion.
Only one more question, Dr. Mortimer. You say that before Sir Charles Baskerville's death several people saw this apparition upon the moor?
Holmes returned to his seat with that quiet look of inward satisfaction which meant that he had a congenial task before him.
No, my dear fellow, it is at the hour of action that I turn to you for aid. But this is splendid, really unique from some points of view.
When you pass Bradley's, would you ask him to send up a pound of the strongest shag tobacco? Thank you.
It would be as well if you could make it convenient not to return before evening. Then I should be very glad to compare impressions as to this most interesting problem which has been submitted to us this morning.
I therefore spent the day at my club and did not return to Baker Street until evening. It was nearly nine o'clock when I found myself in the sitting-room once more.
My first impression as I opened the door was that a fire had broken out, for the room was so filled with smoke that the light of the lamp upon the table was blurred by it.
As I entered, however, my fears were set at rest, for it was the acrid fumes of strong coarse tobacco which took me by the throat and set me coughing.
Through the haze I had a vague vision of Holmes in his dressing-gown coiled up in an armchair with his black clay pipe between his lips.
There is a delightful freshness about you, Watson, which makes it a pleasure to exercise any small powers which I possess at your expense.
A gentleman goes forth on a showery and miry day. He returns immaculate in the evening with the gloss still on his hat and his boots.
He has been a fixture therefore all day. He is not a man with intimate friends. Where, then, could he have been?
The world is full of obvious things which nobody by any chance ever observes. Where do you think that I have been?
Exactly. My body has remained in this arm-chair and has, I regret to observe, consumed in my absence two large pots of coffee and an incredible amount of tobacco.
After you left I sent down to Stamford's for the Ordnance map of this portion of the moor, and my spirit has hovered over it all day.
"Very large." He unrolled one section and held it over his knee. "Here you have the particular district which concerns us.
Exactly. I fancy the Yew Alley, though not marked under that name, must stretch along this line, with the moor, as you perceive, upon the right of it.
This small clump of buildings here is the hamlet of Grimpen, where our friend Dr. Mortimer has his headquarters.
Within a radius of five miles there are, as you see, only a very few scattered dwellings. Here is Lafter Hall, which was mentioned in the narrative.
There is a house indicated here which may be the residence of the naturalist--Stapleton, if I remember right, was his name.
Here are two moorland farm-houses, High Tor and Foulmire. Then fourteen miles away the great convict prison of Princetown.
Between and around these scattered points extends the desolate, lifeless moor. This, then, is the stage upon which tragedy has been played, and upon which we may help to play it again.
The devil's agents may be of flesh and blood, may they not? There are two questions waiting for us at the outset.
The one is whether any crime has been committed at all; the second is, what is the crime and how was it committed?
Of course, if Dr. Mortimer's surmise should be correct, and we are dealing with forces outside the ordinary laws of Nature, there is an end of our investigation.
But we are bound to exhaust all other hypotheses before falling back upon this one. I think we'll shut that window again, if you don't mind.
It has certainly a character of its own. There are points of distinction about it. That change in the footprints, for example.
He only repeated what some fool had said at the inquest. Why should a man walk on tiptoe down the alley?
He was running, Watson--running desperately, running for his life, running until he burst his heart and fell dead upon his face.
There lies our problem. There are indications that the man was crazed with fear before ever he began to run.
If the gipsy's evidence may be taken as true, he ran with cries for help in the direction where help was least likely to be.
Then, again, whom was he waiting for that night, and why was he waiting for him in the Yew Alley rather than in his own house?
The man was elderly and infirm. We can understand his taking an evening stroll, but the ground was damp and the night inclement.
Is it natural that he should stand for five or ten minutes, as Dr. Mortimer, with more practical sense than I should have given him credit for, deduced from the cigar ash?
I think it unlikely that he waited at the moor-gate every evening. On the contrary, the evidence is that he avoided the moor.
That night he waited there. It was the night before he made his departure for London. The thing takes shape, Watson.
It becomes coherent. Might I ask you to hand me my violin, and we will postpone all further thought upon this business until we have had the advantage of meeting Dr. Mortimer and Sir Henry Baskerville in the morning.
Our breakfast-table was cleared early, and Holmes waited in his dressing-gown for the promised interview.
Our clients were punctual to their appointment, for the clock had just struck ten when Dr. Mortimer was shown up, followed by the young baronet.
The latter was a small, alert, dark-eyed man about thirty years of age, very sturdily built, with thick black eyebrows and a strong, pugnacious face.
He wore a ruddy-tinted tweed suit and had the weather-beaten appearance of one who has spent most of his time in the open air, and yet there was something in his steady eye and the quiet assurance of his bearing which indicated the gentleman.
"Why, yes," said he, "and the strange thing is, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, that if my friend here had not proposed coming round to you this morning I should have come on my own account.
I understand that you think out little puzzles, and I've had one this morning which wants more thinking out than I am able to give it.
Pray take a seat, Sir Henry. Do I understand you to say that you have yourself had some remarkable experience since you arrived in London?
Nothing of much importance, Mr. Holmes. Only a joke, as like as not. It was this letter, if you can call it a letter, which reached me this morning.
He laid an envelope upon the table, and we all bent over it. It was of common quality, grayish in colour.
The address, "Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel," was printed in rough characters; the postmark "Charing Cross," and the date of posting the preceding evening.
"Who knew that you were going to the Northumberland Hotel?" asked Holmes, glancing keenly across at our visitor.
"No, I had been staying with a friend," said the doctor. "There was no possible indication that we intended to go to this hotel."
"Hum! Someone seems to be very deeply interested in your movements." Out of the envelope he took a half-sheet of foolscap paper folded into four.
This he opened and spread flat upon the table. Across the middle of it a single sentence had been formed by the expedient of pasting printed words upon it.
It ran: "As you value your life or your reason keep away from the moor." The word "moor" only was printed in ink.
"Now," said Sir Henry Baskerville, "perhaps you will tell me, Mr. Holmes, what in thunder is the meaning of that, and who it is that takes so much interest in my affairs?"
What do you make of it, Dr. Mortimer? You must allow that there is nothing supernatural about this, at any rate?
No, sir, but it might very well come from someone who was convinced that the business is supernatural.
"What business?" asked Sir Henry sharply. "It seems to me that all you gentlemen know a great deal more than I do about my own affairs."
"You shall share our knowledge before you leave this room, Sir Henry. I promise you that," said Sherlock Holmes.
We will confine ourselves for the present with your permission to this very interesting document, which must have been put together and posted yesterday evening.
"Might I trouble you for it--the inside page, please, with the leading articles?" He glanced swiftly over it, running his eyes up and down the columns.
What do you think of that, Watson?" cried Holmes in high glee, rubbing his hands together with satisfaction.
Dr. Mortimer looked at Holmes with an air of professional interest, and Sir Henry Baskerville turned a pair of puzzled dark eyes upon me.
"I don't know much about the tariff and things of that kind," said he; "but it seems to me we've got a bit off the trail so far as that note is concerned."
On the contrary, I think we are particularly hot upon the trail, Sir Henry. Watson here knows more about my methods than you do, but I fear that even he has not quite grasped the significance of this sentence.
And yet, my dear Watson, there is so very close a connection that the one is extracted out of the other.
If any possible doubt remained it is settled by the fact that 'keep away' and 'from the' are cut out in one piece.
"Really, Mr. Holmes, this exceeds anything which I could have imagined," said Dr. Mortimer, gazing at my friend in amazement.
But a Times leader is entirely distinctive, and these words could have been taken from nothing else. As it was done yesterday the strong probability was that we should find the words in yesterday's issue.
"So far as I can follow you, then, Mr. Holmes," said Sir Henry Baskerville, "someone cut out this message with a scissors--"
"Nail-scissors," said Holmes. "You can see that it was a very short-bladed scissors, since the cutter had to take two snips over 'keep away.'"
That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message with a pair of short-bladed scissors, pasted it with paste--
Because he could not find it in print. The other words were all simple and might be found in any issue, but 'moor' would be less common.
There are one or two indications, and yet the utmost pains have been taken to remove all clues. The address, you observe is printed in rough characters.
Again, you will observe that the words are not gummed on in an accurate line, but that some are much higher than others.
'Life,' for example is quite out of its proper place. That may point to carelessness or it may point to agitation and hurry upon the part of the cutter.
On the whole I incline to the latter view, since the matter was evidently important, and it is unlikely that the composer of such a letter would be careless.
If he were in a hurry it opens up the interesting question why he should be in a hurry, since any letter posted up to early morning would reach Sir Henry before he would leave his hotel.
Now, you would call it a guess, no doubt, but I am almost certain that this address has been written in a hotel.
If you examine it carefully you will see that both the pen and the ink have given the writer trouble.
The pen has spluttered twice in a single word, and has run dry three times in a short address, showing that there was very little ink in the bottle.
Now, a private pen or ink-bottle is seldom allowed to be in such a state, and the combination of the two must be quite rare.
He was carefully examining the foolscap, upon which the words were pasted, holding it only an inch or two from his eyes.
"Nothing," said he, throwing it down. "It is a blank half-sheet of paper, without even a water-mark upon it.
I think we have drawn as much as we can from this curious letter; and now, Sir Henry, has anything else of interest happened to you since you have been in London?
"I seem to have walked right into the thick of a dime novel," said our visitor. "Why in thunder should anyone follow or watch me?"
I don't know much of British life yet, for I have spent nearly all my time in the States and in Canada.
"My dear sir," cried Dr. Mortimer, "it is only mislaid. You will find it when you return to the hotel.
"Exactly," said Holmes, "however foolish the incident may seem. You have lost one of your boots, you say?"
Well, mislaid it, anyhow. I put them both outside my door last night, and there was only one in the morning.
I could get no sense out of the chap who cleans them. The worst of it is that I only bought the pair last night in the Strand, and I have never had them on.
Then I understand that on your arrival in London yesterday you went out at once and bought a pair of boots?
Among other things I bought these brown boots--gave six dollars for them--and had one stolen before ever I had them on my feet.
"It seems a singularly useless thing to steal," said Sherlock Holmes. "I confess that I share Dr. Mortimer's belief that it will not be long before the missing boot is found."
"And, now, gentlemen," said the baronet with decision, "it seems to me that I have spoken quite enough about the little that I know.
"Your request is a very reasonable one," Holmes answered. "Dr. Mortimer, I think you could not do better than to tell your story as you told it to us."
Thus encouraged, our scientific friend drew his papers from his pocket, and presented the whole case as he had done upon the morning before.
Sir Henry Baskerville listened with the deepest attention, and with an occasional exclamation of surprise.
"Well, I seem to have come into an inheritance with a vengeance," said he when the long narrative was finished.
Of course, I've heard of the hound ever since I was in the nursery. It's the pet story of the family, though I never thought of taking it seriously before.
But as to my uncle's death--well, it all seems boiling up in my head, and I can't get it clear yet. You don't seem quite to have made up your mind whether it's a case for a policeman or a clergyman.
"It seems to show that someone knows more than we do about what goes on upon the moor," said Dr. Mortimer.
"And also," said Holmes, "that someone is not ill-disposed towards you, since they warn you of danger."
Well, of course, that is possible also. I am very much indebted to you, Dr. Mortimer, for introducing me to a problem which presents several interesting alternatives.
But the practical point which we now have to decide, Sir Henry, is whether it is or is not advisable for you to go to Baskerville Hall.
His dark brows knitted and his face flushed to a dusky red as he spoke. It was evident that the fiery temper of the Baskervilles was not extinct in this their last representative.
"Meanwhile," said he, "I have hardly had time to think over all that you have told me. It's a big thing for a man to have to understand and to decide at one sitting.
I should like to have a quiet hour by myself to make up my mind. Now, look here, Mr. Holmes, it's half-past eleven now and I am going back right away to my hotel.
Suppose you and your friend, Dr. Watson, come round and lunch with us at two. I'll be able to tell you more clearly then how this thing strikes me.
We heard the steps of our visitors descend the stair and the bang of the front door. In an instant Holmes had changed from the languid dreamer to the man of action.
"Your hat and boots, Watson, quick! Not a moment to lose!" He rushed into his room in his dressing-gown and was back again in a few seconds in a frock-coat.
We hurried together down the stairs and into the street. Dr. Mortimer and Baskerville were still visible about two hundred yards ahead of us in the direction of Oxford Street.
Not for the world, my dear Watson. I am perfectly satisfied with your company if you will tolerate mine.
He quickened his pace until we had decreased the distance which divided us by about half. Then, still keeping a hundred yards behind, we followed into Oxford Street and so down Regent Street.
Once our friends stopped and stared into a shop window, upon which Holmes did the same. An instant afterwards he gave a little cry of satisfaction, and, following the direction of his eager eyes, I saw that a hansom cab with a man inside which had halted on the other side of the street was now proceeding slowly onward again.
At that instant I was aware of a bushy black beard and a pair of piercing eyes turned upon us through the side window of the cab.
Instantly the trapdoor at the top flew up, something was screamed to the driver, and the cab flew madly off down Regent Street.
Holmes looked eagerly round for another, but no empty one was in sight. Then he dashed in wild pursuit amid the stream of the traffic, but the start was too great, and already the cab was out of sight.
"There now!" said Holmes bitterly as he emerged panting and white with vexation from the tide of vehicles.
Was ever such bad luck and such bad management, too? Watson, Watson, if you are an honest man you will record this also and set it against my successes!
Well, it was evident from what we have heard that Baskerville has been very closely shadowed by someone since he has been in town.
How else could it be known so quickly that it was the Northumberland Hotel which he had chosen? If they had followed him the first day I argued that they would follow him also the second.
You may have observed that I twice strolled over to the window while Dr. Mortimer was reading his legend.
I was looking out for loiterers in the street, but I saw none. We are dealing with a clever man, Watson.
This matter cuts very deep, and though I have not finally made up my mind whether it is a benevolent or a malevolent agency which is in touch with us, I am conscious always of power and design.
When our friends left I at once followed them in the hopes of marking down their invisible attendant.
So wily was he that he had not trusted himself upon foot, but he had availed himself of a cab so that he could loiter behind or dash past them and so escape their notice.
His method had the additional advantage that if they were to take a cab he was all ready to follow them.
My dear Watson, clumsy as I have been, you surely do not seriously imagine that I neglected to get the number?
When our unknown had followed Baskerville home we should have had the opportunity of playing his own game upon himself and seeing where he made for.
As it is, by an indiscreet eagerness, which was taken advantage of with extraordinary quickness and energy by our opponent, we have betrayed ourselves and lost our man.
We had been sauntering slowly down Regent Street during this conversation, and Dr. Mortimer, with his companion, had long vanished in front of us.
"There is no object in our following them," said Holmes. "The shadow has departed and will not return.
We must see what further cards we have in our hands and play them with decision. Could you swear to that man's face within the cab?
And so could I--from which I gather that in all probability it was a false one. A clever man upon so delicate an errand has no use for a beard save to conceal his features.
Ah, Wilson, I see you have not forgotten the little case in which I had the good fortune to help you?
My dear fellow, you exaggerate. I have some recollection, Wilson, that you had among your boys a lad named Cartwright, who showed some ability during the investigation.
A lad of fourteen, with a bright, keen face, had obeyed the summons of the manager. He stood now gazing with great reverence at the famous detective.
"Let me have the Hotel Directory," said Holmes. "Thank you! Now, Cartwright, there are the names of twenty-three hotels here, all in the immediate neighbourhood of Charing Cross.
You will begin in each case by giving the outside porter one shilling. Here are twenty-three shillings.
You will tell him that you want to see the waste-paper of yesterday. You will say that an important telegram has miscarried and that you are looking for it.
But what you are really looking for is the centre page of the Times with some holes cut in it with scissors.
In each case the outside porter will send for the hall porter, to whom also you will give a shilling.
Here are twenty-three shillings. You will then learn in possibly twenty cases out of the twenty-three that the waste of the day before has been burned or removed.
In the three other cases you will be shown a heap of paper and you will look for this page of the Times among it.
The odds are enormously against your finding it. There are ten shillings over in case of emergencies.
Let me have a report by wire at Baker Street before evening. And now, Watson, it only remains for us to find out by wire the identity of the cabman, No.
He would talk of nothing but art, of which he had the crudest ideas, from our leaving the gallery until we found ourselves at the Northumberland Hotel.
"Sir Henry Baskerville is upstairs expecting you," said the clerk. "He asked me to show you up at once when you came."
The book showed that two names had been added after that of Baskerville. One was Theophilus Johnson and family, of Newcastle; the other Mrs. Oldmore and maid, of High Lodge, Alton.
"Surely that must be the same Johnson whom I used to know," said Holmes to the porter. "A lawyer, is he not, gray-headed, and walks with a limp?"
Ah, that settles it. Mrs. Oldmore, too; I seem to remember the name. Excuse my curiosity, but often in calling upon one friend one finds another.
She is an invalid lady, sir. Her husband was once mayor of Gloucester. She always comes to us when she is in town.
"Thank you; I am afraid I cannot claim her acquaintance. We have established a most important fact by these questions, Watson," he continued in a low voice as we went upstairs together.
We know now that the people who are so interested in our friend have not settled down in his own hotel.
That means that while they are, as we have seen, very anxious to watch him, they are equally anxious that he should not see them.
As we came round the top of the stairs we had run up against Sir Henry Baskerville himself. His face was flushed with anger, and he held an old and dusty boot in one of his hands.
So furious was he that he was hardly articulate, and when he did speak it was in a much broader and more Western dialect than any which we had heard from him in the morning.
"Seems to me they are playing me for a sucker in this hotel," he cried. "They'll find they've started in to monkey with the wrong man unless they are careful.
By thunder, if that chap can't find my missing boot there will be trouble. I can take a joke with the best, Mr. Holmes, but they've got a bit over the mark this time.
That's just what I do mean to say. I only had three pairs in the world--the new brown, the old black, and the patent leathers, which I am wearing.
Last night they took one of my brown ones, and to-day they have sneaked one of the black. Well, have you got it?
Well, either that boot comes back before sundown or I'll see the manager and tell him that I go right straight out of this hotel.
Mind it is, for it's the last thing of mine that I'll lose in this den of thieves. Well, well, Mr. Holmes, you'll excuse my troubling you about such a trifle----
I just don't attempt to explain it. It seems the very maddest, queerest thing that ever happened to me.
But we hold several threads in our hands, and the odds are that one or other of them guides us to the truth.
We had a pleasant luncheon in which little was said of the business which had brought us together. It was in the private sitting-room to which we afterwards repaired that Holmes asked Baskerville what were his intentions.
If their intentions are evil they might do you a mischief, and we should be powerless to prevent it. You did not know, Dr. Mortimer, that you were followed this morning from my house?
That, unfortunately, is what I cannot tell you. Have you among your neighbours or acquaintances on Dartmoor any man with a black, full beard?
Give me a telegraph form. 'Is all ready for Sir Henry?' That will do. Address to Mr. Barrymore, Baskerville Hall.
What is the nearest telegraph-office? Grimpen. Very good, we will send a second wire to the postmaster, Grimpen: 'Telegram to Mr. Barrymore to be delivered into his own hand.
If absent, please return wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel.' That should let us know before evening whether Barrymore is at his post in Devonshire or not.
He is the son of the old caretaker, who is dead. They have looked after the Hall for four generations now.
"At the same time," said Baskerville, "it's clear enough that so long as there are none of the family at the Hall these people have a mighty fine home and nothing to do."
"I hope," said Dr. Mortimer, "that you do not look with suspicious eyes upon everyone who received a legacy from Sir Charles, for I also had a thousand pounds left to me."
There were many insignificant sums to individuals, and a large number of public charities. The residue all went to Sir Henry.
Holmes raised his eyebrows in surprise. "I had no idea that so gigantic a sum was involved," said he.
Sir Charles had the reputation of being rich, but we did not know how very rich he was until we came to examine his securities.
Dear me! It is a stake for which a man might well play a desperate game. And one more question, Dr. Mortimer.
Supposing that anything happened to our young friend here--you will forgive the unpleasant hypothesis!--who would inherit the estate?
Since Rodger Baskerville, Sir Charles's younger brother died unmarried, the estate would descend to the Desmonds, who are distant cousins.
Yes; he once came down to visit Sir Charles. He is a man of venerable appearance and of saintly life.
He would be the heir to the estate because that is entailed. He would also be the heir to the money unless it were willed otherwise by the present owner, who can, of course, do what he likes with it.
No, Mr. Holmes, I have not. I've had no time, for it was only yesterday that I learned how matters stood.
But in any case I feel that the money should go with the title and estate. That was my poor uncle's idea.
How is the owner going to restore the glories of the Baskervilles if he has not money enough to keep up the property?
Quite so. Well, Sir Henry, I am of one mind with you as to the advisability of your going down to Devonshire without delay.
But Dr. Mortimer has his practice to attend to, and his house is miles away from yours. With all the good will in the world he may be unable to help you.
At the present instant one of the most revered names in England is being besmirched by a blackmailer, and only I can stop a disastrous scandal.
If my friend would undertake it there is no man who is better worth having at your side when you are in a tight place.
The proposition took me completely by surprise, but before I had time to answer, Baskerville seized me by the hand and wrung it heartily.
"Well, now, that is real kind of you, Dr. Watson," said he. "You see how it is with me, and you know just as much about the matter as I do.
The promise of adventure had always a fascination for me, and I was complimented by the words of Holmes and by the eagerness with which the baronet hailed me as a companion.
"And you will report very carefully to me," said Holmes. "When a crisis comes, as it will do, I will direct how you shall act.
We had risen to depart when Baskerville gave a cry, of triumph, and diving into one of the corners of the room he drew a brown boot from under a cabinet.
"But it is a very singular thing," Dr. Mortimer remarked. "I searched this room carefully before lunch."
The German was sent for but professed to know nothing of the matter, nor could any inquiry clear it up.
Another item had been added to that constant and apparently purposeless series of small mysteries which had succeeded each other so rapidly.
Visited twenty-three hotels as directed, but sorry, to report unable to trace cut sheet of Times.--CARTWRIGHT.
There go two of my threads, Watson. There is nothing more stimulating than a case where everything goes against you.
Exactly. I have wired to get his name and address from the Official Registry. I should not be surprised if this were an answer to my question.
The ring at the bell proved to be something even more satisfactory than an answer, however, for the door opened and a rough-looking fellow entered who was evidently the man himself.
"I got a message from the head office that a gent at this address had been inquiring for 2704," said he.
I've driven my cab this seven years and never a word of complaint. I came here straight from the Yard to ask you to your face what you had against me.
"I have nothing in the world against you, my good man," said Holmes. "On the contrary, I have half a sovereign for you if you will give me a clear answer to my questions."
"Well, I've had a good day and no mistake," said the cabman, with a grin. "What was it you wanted to ask, sir?"
Now, Clayton, tell me all about the fare who came and watched this house at ten o'clock this morning and afterwards followed the two gentlemen down Regent Street.
The man looked surprised and a little embarrassed. "Why, there's no good my telling you things, for you seem to know as much as I do already," said he.
The truth is that the gentleman told me that he was a detective and that I was to say nothing about him to anyone.
My good fellow, this is a very serious business, and you may find yourself in a pretty bad position if you try to hide anything from me.
Holmes cast a swift glance of triumph at me. "Oh, he mentioned his name, did he? That was imprudent. What was the name that he mentioned?"
Never have I seen my friend more completely taken aback than by the cabman's reply. For an instant he sat in silent amazement.
"A touch, Watson--an undeniable touch!" said he. "I feel a foil as quick and supple as my own. He got home upon me very prettily that time.
He hailed me at half-past nine in Trafalgar Square. He said that he was a detective, and he offered me two guineas if I would do exactly what he wanted all day and ask no questions.
I was glad enough to agree. First we drove down to the Northumberland Hotel and waited there until two gentlemen came out and took a cab from the rank.
Well, I couldn't be sure of that, but I dare say my fare knew all about it. We pulled up half-way down the street and waited an hour and a half.
Until we got three-quarters down Regent Street. Then my gentleman threw up the trap, and he cried that I should drive right away to Waterloo Station as hard as I could go.
I whipped up the mare and we were there under the ten minutes. Then he paid up his two guineas, like a good one, and away he went into the station.
Only just as he was leaving he turned round and he said: 'It might interest you to know that you have been driving Mr. Sherlock Holmes.'
He was dressed like a toff, and he had a black beard, cut square at the end, and a pale face. I don't know as I could say more than that.
Well, then, here is your half-sovereign. There's another one waiting for you if you can bring any more information.
John Clayton departed chuckling, and Holmes turned to me with a shrug of his shoulders and a rueful smile.
I tell you, Watson, this time we have got a foeman who is worthy of our steel. I've been checkmated in London.
About sending you. It's an ugly business, Watson, an ugly dangerous business, and the more I see of it the less I like it.
Yes, my dear fellow, you may laugh, but I give you my word that I shall be very glad to have you back safe and sound in Baker Street once more.
Sir Henry Baskerville and Dr. Mortimer were ready upon the appointed day, and we started as arranged for Devonshire.
Mr. Sherlock Holmes drove with me to the station and gave me his last parting injunctions and advice.
"I will not bias your mind by suggesting theories or suspicions, Watson," said he; "I wish you simply to report facts in the fullest possible manner to me, and you can leave me to do the theorizing."
I really think that we may eliminate him entirely from our calculations. There remain the people who will actually surround Sir Henry Baskerville upon the moor.
By no means. You could not make a greater mistake. If they are innocent it would be a cruel injustice, and if they are guilty we should be giving up all chance of bringing it home to them.
No, no, we will preserve them upon our list of suspects. Then there is a groom at the Hall, if I remember right.
There are two moorland farmers. There is our friend Dr. Mortimer, whom I believe to be entirely honest, and there is his wife, of whom we know nothing.
There is this naturalist, Stapleton, and there is his sister, who is said to be a young lady of attractions.
There is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who is also an unknown factor, and there are one or two other neighbours.
"No, we have no news of any kind," said Dr. Mortimer in answer to my friend's questions. "I can swear to one thing, and that is that we have not been shadowed during the last two days.
Except yesterday afternoon. I usually give up one day to pure amusement when I come to town, so I spent it at the Museum of the College of Surgeons.
"It was imprudent, all the same," said Holmes, shaking his head and looking very grave. "I beg, Sir Henry, that you will not go about alone.
"Indeed. That is very interesting. Well, good-bye," he added as the train began to glide down the platform.
Bear in mind, Sir Henry, one of the phrases in that queer old legend which Dr. Mortimer has read to us, and avoid the moor in those hours of darkness when the powers of evil are exalted.
I looked back at the platform when we had left it far behind, and saw the tall, austere figure of Holmes standing motionless and gazing after us.
The journey was a swift and pleasant one, and I spent it in making the more intimate acquaintance of my two companions and in playing with Dr. Mortimer's spaniel.
Young Baskerville stared eagerly out of the window, and cried aloud with delight as he recognized the familiar features of the Devon scenery.
"I've been over a good part of the world since I left it, Dr. Watson," said he; "but I have never seen a place to compare with it."
Poor Sir Charles's head was of a very rare type, half Gaelic, half Ivernian in its characteristics. But you were very young when you last saw Baskerville Hall, were you not?
I was a boy in my 'teens at the time of my father's death, and had never seen the Hall, for he lived in a little cottage on the South Coast.
Thence I went straight to a friend in America. I tell you it is all as new to me as it is to Dr. Watson, and I'm as keen as possible to see the moor.
"Are you? Then your wish is easily granted, for there is your first sight of the moor," said Dr. Mortimer, pointing out of the carriage window.
There were pride, valour, and strength in his thick brows, his sensitive nostrils, and his large hazel eyes.
If on that forbidding moor a difficult and dangerous quest should lie before us, this was at least a comrade for whom one might venture to take a risk with the certainty that he would bravely share it.
The train pulled up at a small wayside station and we all descended. Outside, beyond the low, white fence, a wagonette with a pair of cobs was waiting.
Our coming was evidently a great event, for station-master and porters clustered round us to carry out our luggage.
The coachman, a hard-faced, gnarled little fellow, saluted Sir Henry Baskerville, and in a few minutes we were flying swiftly down the broad, white road.
Rolling pasture lands curved upward on either side of us, and old gabled houses peeped out from amid the thick green foliage, but behind the peaceful and sunlit country-side there rose ever, dark against the evening sky, the long, gloomy curve of the moor, broken by the jagged and sinister hills.
The wagonette swung round into a side road, and we curved upward through deep lanes worn by centuries of wheels, high banks on either side, heavy with dripping moss and fleshy hart's-tongue ferns.
Both road and stream wound up through a valley dense with scrub oak and fir. At every turn Baskerville gave an exclamation of delight, looking eagerly about him and asking countless questions.
To his eyes all seemed beautiful, but to me a tinge of melancholy lay upon the country-side, which bore so clearly the mark of the waning year.
Yellow leaves carpeted the lanes and fluttered down upon us as we passed. The rattle of our wheels died away as we drove through drifts of rotting vegetation--sad gifts, as it seemed to me, for Nature to throw before the carriage of the returning heir of the Baskervilles.
There's a convict escaped from Princetown, sir. He's been out three days now, and the warders watch every road and every station, but they've had no sight of him yet.
Yes, sir, but the chance of five pounds is but a poor thing compared to the chance of having your throat cut.
The commutation of his death sentence had been due to some doubts as to his complete sanity, so atrocious was his conduct.
Our wagonette had topped a rise and in front of us rose the huge expanse of the moor, mottled with gnarled and craggy cairns and tors.
It needed but this to complete the grim suggestiveness of the barren waste, the chilling wind, and the darkling sky.
The road in front of us grew bleaker and wilder over huge russet and olive slopes, sprinkled with giant boulders.
Now and then we passed a moorland cottage, walled and roofed with stone, with no creeper to break its harsh outline.
Suddenly we looked down into a cup-like depression, patched with stunted oaks and firs which had been twisted and bent by the fury of years of storm.
The lodge was a ruin of black granite and bared ribs of rafters, but facing it was a new building, half constructed, the first fruit of Sir Charles's South African gold.
Through the gateway we passed into the avenue, where the wheels were again hushed amid the leaves, and the old trees shot their branches in a sombre tunnel over our heads.
Baskerville shuddered as he looked up the long, dark drive to where the house glimmered like a ghost at the farther end.
"It's no wonder my uncle felt as if trouble were coming on him in such a place as this," said he. "It's enough to scare any man.
I'll have a row of electric lamps up here inside of six months, and you won't know it again, with a thousand candle-power Swan and Edison right here in front of the hall door.
The avenue opened into a broad expanse of turf, and the house lay before us. In the fading light I could see that the centre was a heavy block of building from which a porch projected.
The whole front was draped in ivy, with a patch clipped bare here and there where a window or a coat-of-arms broke through the dark veil.
From this central block rose the twin towers, ancient, crenelated, and pierced with many loopholes. To right and left of the turrets were more modern wings of black granite.
A dull light shone through heavy mullioned windows, and from the high chimneys which rose from the steep, high-angled roof there sprang a single black column of smoke.
A tall man had stepped from the shadow of the porch to open the door of the wagonette. The figure of a woman was silhouetted against the yellow light of the hall.
No, I must go. I shall probably find some work awaiting me. I would stay to show you over the house, but Barrymore will be a better guide than I. Good-bye, and never hesitate night or day to send for me if I can be of service.
The wheels died away down the drive while Sir Henry and I turned into the hall, and the door clanged heavily behind us.
It was a fine apartment in which we found ourselves, large, lofty, and heavily raftered with huge balks of age-blackened oak.
In the great old-fashioned fireplace behind the high iron dogs a log-fire crackled and snapped. Sir Henry and I held out our hands to it, for we were numb from our long drive.
Then we gazed round us at the high, thin window of old stained glass, the oak panelling, the stags' heads, the coats-of-arms upon the walls, all dim and sombre in the subdued light of the central lamp.
"It's just as I imagined it," said Sir Henry. "Is it not the very picture of an old family home? To think that this should be the same hall in which for five hundred years my people have lived.
I saw his dark face lit up with a boyish enthusiasm as he gazed about him. The light beat upon him where he stood, but long shadows trailed down the walls and hung like a black canopy above him.
Barrymore had returned from taking our luggage to our rooms. He stood in front of us now with the subdued manner of a well-trained servant.
He was a remarkable-looking man, tall, handsome, with a square black beard and pale, distinguished features.
In a very few minutes, sir. You will find hot water in your rooms. My wife and I will be happy, Sir Henry, to stay with you until you have made your fresh arrangements, but you will understand that under the new conditions this house will require a considerable staff.
I only meant, sir, that Sir Charles led a very retired life, and we were able to look after his wants.
But your family have been with us for several generations, have they not? I should be sorry to begin my life here by breaking an old family connection.
I feel that also, sir, and so does my wife. But to tell the truth, sir, we were both very much attached to Sir Charles, and his death gave us a shock and made these surroundings very painful to us.
I have no doubt, sir, that we shall succeed in establishing ourselves in some business. Sir Charles's generosity has given us the means to do so.
My own was in the same wing as Baskerville's and almost next door to it. These rooms appeared to be much more modern than the central part of the house, and the bright paper and numerous candles did something to remove the sombre impression which our arrival had left upon my mind.
At one end a minstrel's gallery overlooked it. Black beams shot across above our heads, with a smoke-darkened ceiling beyond them.
A dim line of ancestors, in every variety of dress, from the Elizabethan knight to the buck of the Regency, stared down upon us and daunted us by their silent company.
We talked little, and I for one was glad when the meal was over and we were able to retire into the modern billiard-room and smoke a cigarette.
"My word, it isn't a very cheerful place," said Sir Henry. "I suppose one can tone down to it, but I feel a bit out of the picture at present.
I don't wonder that my uncle got a little jumpy if he lived all alone in such a house as this. However, if it suits you, we will retire early to-night, and perhaps things may seem more cheerful in the morning.
I drew aside my curtains before I went to bed and looked out from my window. It opened upon the grassy space which lay in front of the hall door.
Beyond, two copses of trees moaned and swung in a rising wind. A half moon broke through the rifts of racing clouds.
In its cold light I saw beyond the trees a broken fringe of rocks, and the long, low curve of the melancholy moor.
And yet it was not quite the last. I found myself weary and yet wakeful, tossing restlessly from side to side, seeking for the sleep which would not come.
Far away a chiming clock struck out the quarters of the hours, but otherwise a deathly silence lay upon the old house.
And then suddenly, in the very dead of the night, there came a sound to my ears, clear, resonant, and unmistakable.
It was the sob of a woman, the muffled, strangling gasp of one who is torn by an uncontrollable sorrow.
I sat up in bed and listened intently. The noise could not have been far away and was certainly in the house.
For half an hour I waited with every nerve on the alert, but there came no other sound save the chiming clock and the rustle of the ivy on the wall.
The fresh beauty of the following morning did something to efface from our minds the grim and gray impression which had been left upon both of us by our first experience of Baskerville Hall.
As Sir Henry and I sat at breakfast the sunlight flooded in through the high mullioned windows, throwing watery patches of colour from the coats of arms which covered them.
The dark panelling glowed like bronze in the golden rays, and it was hard to realize that this was indeed the chamber which had struck such a gloom into our souls upon the evening before.
"I guess it is ourselves and not the house that we have to blame!" said the baronet. "We were tired with our journey and chilled by our drive, so we took a gray view of the place.
"And yet it was not entirely a question of imagination," I answered. "Did you, for example, happen to hear someone, a woman I think, sobbing in the night?"
That is curious, for I did when I was half asleep fancy that I heard something of the sort. I waited quite a time, but there was no more of it, so I concluded that it was all a dream.
"We must ask about this right away." He rang the bell and asked Barrymore whether he could account for our experience.
It seemed to me that the pallid features of the butler turned a shade paler still as he listened to his master's question.
"There are only two women in the house, Sir Henry," he answered. "One is the scullery-maid, who sleeps in the other wing.
And yet he lied as he said it, for it chanced that after breakfast I met Mrs. Barrymore in the long corridor with the sun full upon her face.
She was a large, impassive, heavy-featured woman with a stern set expression of mouth. But her tell-tale eyes were red and glanced at me from between swollen lids.
It was she, then, who wept in the night, and if she did so her husband must know it. Yet he had taken the obvious risk of discovery in declaring that it was not so.
Why had he done this? And why did she weep so bitterly? Already round this pale-faced, handsome, black-bearded man there was gathering an atmosphere of mystery and of gloom.
It was he who had been the first to discover the body of Sir Charles, and we had only his word for all the circumstances which led up to the old man's death.
Was it possible that it was Barrymore after all whom we had seen in the cab in Regent Street? The beard might well have been the same.
The cabman had described a somewhat shorter man, but such an impression might easily have been erroneous.
How could I settle the point forever? Obviously the first thing to do was to see the Grimpen postmaster, and find whether the test telegram had really been placed in Barrymore's own hands.
Sir Henry had numerous papers to examine after breakfast, so that the time was propitious for my excursion.
Well, he was up in the loft at the time, so that I could not put it into his own hands, but I gave it into Mrs. Barrymore's hands, and she promised to deliver it at once.
"Well, surely his own wife ought to know where he is," said the postmaster testily. "Didn't he get the telegram?
It seemed hopeless to pursue the inquiry any farther, but it was clear that in spite of Holmes's ruse we had no proof that Barrymore had not been in London all the time.
Suppose that it were so--suppose that the same man had been the last who had seen Sir Charles alive, and the first to dog the new heir when he returned to England.
What then? Was he the agent of others or had he some sinister design of his own? What interest could he have in persecuting the Baskerville family?
I thought of the strange warning clipped out of the leading article of the Times. Was that his work or was it possibly the doing of someone who was bent upon counteracting his schemes?
The only conceivable motive was that which had been suggested by Sir Henry, that if the family could be scared away a comfortable and permanent home would be secured for the Barrymores.
But surely such an explanation as that would be quite inadequate to account for the deep and subtle scheming which seemed to be weaving an invisible net round the young baronet.
Holmes himself had said that no more complex case had come to him in all the long series of his sensational investigations.
I prayed, as I walked back along the gray, lonely road, that my friend might soon be freed from his preoccupations and able to come down to take this heavy burden of responsibility from my shoulders.
Suddenly my thoughts were interrupted by the sound of running feet behind me and by a voice which called me by name.
A tin box for botanical specimens hung over his shoulder and he carried a green butterfly-net in one of his hands.
"You will, I am sure, excuse my presumption, Dr. Watson," said he, as he came panting up to where I stood.
Here on the moor we are homely folk and do not wait for formal introductions. You may possibly have heard my name from our mutual friend, Mortimer.
"Your net and box would have told me as much," said I, "for I knew that Mr. Stapleton was a naturalist.
I have been calling on Mortimer, and he pointed you out to me from the window of his surgery as you passed.
As our road lay the same way I thought that I would overtake you and introduce myself. I trust that Sir Henry is none the worse for his journey?
We were all rather afraid that after the sad death of Sir Charles the new baronet might refuse to live here.
It is asking much of a wealthy man to come down and bury himself in a place of this kind, but I need not tell you that it means a very great deal to the country-side.
It is extraordinary how credulous the peasants are about here! Any number of them are ready to swear that they have seen such a creature upon the moor.
He spoke with a smile, but I seemed to read in his eyes that he took the matter more seriously. "The story took a great hold upon the imagination of Sir Charles, and I have no doubt that it led to his tragic end."
His nerves were so worked up that the appearance of any dog might have had a fatal effect upon his diseased heart.
I fancy that he really did see something of the kind upon that last night in the Yew Alley. I feared that some disaster might occur, for I was very fond of the old man, and I knew that his heart was weak.
The words took away my breath for an instant, but a glance at the placid face and steadfast eyes of my companion showed that no surprise was intended.
"It is useless for us to pretend that we do not know you, Dr. Watson," said he. "The records of your detective have reached us here, and you could not celebrate him without being known yourself.
When Mortimer told me your name he could not deny your identity. If you are here, then it follows that Mr. Sherlock Holmes is interesting himself in the matter, and I am naturally curious to know what view he may take.
If I had any indication of the nature of your suspicions or how you propose to investigate the case, I might perhaps even now give you some aid or advice.
I assure you that I am simply here upon a visit to my friend, Sir Henry, and that I need no help of any kind.
"Excellent!" said Stapleton. "You are perfectly right to be wary and discreet. I am justly reproved for what I feel was an unjustifiable intrusion, and I promise you that I will not mention the matter again."
We had come to a point where a narrow grassy path struck off from the road and wound away across the moor.
A steep, boulder-sprinkled hill lay upon the right which had in bygone days been cut into a granite quarry.
The face which was turned towards us formed a dark cliff, with ferns and brambles growing in its niches.
"A moderate walk along this moor-path brings us to Merripit House," said he. "Perhaps you will spare an hour that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to my sister."
My first thought was that I should be by Sir Henry's side. But then I remembered the pile of papers and bills with which his study table was littered.
It was certain that I could not help with those. And Holmes had expressly said that I should study the neighbours upon the moor.
"It is a wonderful place, the moor," said he, looking round over the undulating downs, long green rollers, with crests of jagged granite foaming up into fantastic surges.
You never tire of the moor. You cannot think the wonderful secrets which it contains. It is so vast, and so barren, and so mysterious.
I have only been here two years. The residents would call me a newcomer. We came shortly after Sir Charles settled.
But my tastes led me to explore every part of the country round, and I should think that there are few men who know it better than I do.
Very hard. You see, for example, this great plain to the north here with the queer hills breaking out of it.
You would naturally think so and the thought has cost several their lives before now. You notice those bright green spots scattered thickly over it?
"That is the great Grimpen Mire," said he. "A false step yonder means death to man or beast. Only yesterday I saw one of the moor ponies wander into it.
He never came out. I saw his head for quite a long time craning out of the bog-hole, but it sucked him down at last.
Even in dry seasons it is a danger to cross it, but after these autumn rains it is an awful place. And yet I can find my way to the very heart of it and return alive.
Something brown was rolling and tossing among the green sedges. Then a long, agonized, writhing neck shot upward and a dreadful cry echoed over the moor.
Well, you see the hills beyond? They are really islands cut off on all sides by the impassable mire, which has crawled round them in the course of years.
"For God's sake put such an idea out of your mind," said he. "Your blood would be upon my head. I assure you that there would not be the least chance of your coming back alive.
A long, low moan, indescribably sad, swept over the moor. It filled the whole air, and yet it was impossible to say whence it came.
From a dull murmur it swelled into a deep roar, and then sank back into a melancholy, throbbing murmur once again.
The peasants say it is the Hound of the Baskervilles calling for its prey. I've heard it once or twice before, but never quite so loud.
I looked round, with a chill of fear in my heart, at the huge swelling plain, mottled with the green patches of rushes.
Nothing stirred over the vast expanse save a pair of ravens, which croaked loudly from a tor behind us.
"You are an educated man. You don't believe such nonsense as that?" said I. "What do you think is the cause of so strange a sound?"
It's a very rare bird--practically extinct--in England now, but all things are possible upon the moor.
Yes, I should not be surprised to learn that what we have heard is the cry of the last of the bitterns.
Yes, it's rather an uncanny place altogether. Look at the hill- side yonder. What do you make of those?
He grazed his cattle on these slopes, and he learned to dig for tin when the bronze sword began to supersede the stone axe.
Look at the great trench in the opposite hill. That is his mark. Yes, you will find some very singular points about the moor, Dr. Watson.
A small fly or moth had fluttered across our path, and in an instant Stapleton was rushing with extraordinary energy and speed in pursuit of it.
To my dismay the creature flew straight for the great mire, and my acquaintance never paused for an instant, bounding from tuft to tuft behind it, his green net waving in the air.
She had come from the direction in which the plume of smoke indicated the position of Merripit House, but the dip of the moor had hid her until she was quite close.
She had a proud, finely cut face, so regular that it might have seemed impassive were it not for the sensitive mouth and the beautiful dark, eager eyes.
With her perfect figure and elegant dress she was, indeed, a strange apparition upon a lonely moorland path.
Her eyes were on her brother as I turned, and then she quickened her pace towards me. I had raised my hat and was about to make some explanatory remark, when her own words turned all my thoughts into a new channel.
I could only stare at her in stupid surprise. Her eyes blazed at me, and she tapped the ground impatiently with her foot.
"I cannot explain." She spoke in a low, eager voice, with a curious lisp in her utterance. "But for God's sake do what I ask you.
"Man, man!" she cried. "Can you not tell when a warning is for your own good? Go back to London! Start to-night!
Get away from this place at all costs! Hush, my brother is coming! Not a word of what I have said. Would you mind getting that orchid for me among the mares-tails yonder?
We are very rich in orchids on the moor, though, of course, you are rather late to see the beauties of the place.
"Halloa, Beryl!" said he, and it seemed to me that the tone of his greeting was not altogether a cordial one.
Yes, I was chasing a Cyclopides. He is very rare and seldom found in the late autumn. What a pity that I should have missed him!
A flush of vexation passed over her expressive face. "We have been talking at cross purposes," said she.
"I talked as if Dr. Watson were a resident instead of being merely a visitor," said she. "It cannot much matter to him whether it is early or late for the orchids.
A short walk brought us to it, a bleak moorland house, once the farm of some grazier in the old prosperous days, but now put into repair and turned into a modern dwelling.
An orchard surrounded it, but the trees, as is usual upon the moor, were stunted and nipped, and the effect of the whole place was mean and melancholy.
We were admitted by a strange, wizened, rusty-coated old manservant, who seemed in keeping with the house.
Inside, however, there were large rooms furnished with an elegance in which I seemed to recognize the taste of the lady.
As I looked from their windows at the interminable granite-flecked moor rolling unbroken to the farthest horizon I could not but marvel at what could have brought this highly educated man and this beautiful woman to live in such a place.
"Queer spot to choose, is it not?" said he as if in answer to my thought. "And yet we manage to make ourselves fairly happy, do we not, Beryl?"
However, the fates were against us. A serious epidemic broke out in the school and three of the boys died.
All this, Dr. Watson, has been brought upon your head by your expression as you surveyed the moor out of our window.
It certainly did cross my mind that it might be a little dull--less for you, perhaps, than for your sister.
We have books, we have our studies, and we have interesting neighbours. Dr. Mortimer is a most learned man in his own line.
Poor Sir Charles was also an admirable companion. We knew him well, and miss him more than I can tell.
Do you think that I should intrude if I were to call this afternoon and make the acquaintance of Sir Henry?
Then perhaps you would mention that I propose to do so. We may in our humble way do something to make things more easy for him until he becomes accustomed to his new surroundings.
Will you come upstairs, Dr. Watson, and inspect my collection of Lepidoptera? I think it is the most complete one in the south-west of England.
I resisted all pressure to stay for lunch, and I set off at once upon my return journey, taking the grass-grown path by which we had come.
"I have run all the way in order to cut you off, Dr. Watson," said she. "I had not even time to put on my hat.
I must not stop, or my brother may miss me. I wanted to say to you how sorry I am about the stupid mistake I made in thinking that you were Sir Henry.
"But I can't forget them, Miss Stapleton," said I. "I am Sir Henry's friend, and his welfare is a very close concern of mine.
A woman's whim, Dr. Watson. When you know me better you will understand that I cannot always give reasons for what I say or do.
Life has become like that great Grimpen Mire, with little green patches everywhere into which one may sink and with no guide to point the track.
An expression of irresolution passed for an instant over her face, but her eyes had hardened again when she answered me.
But I do. If you have any influence with Sir Henry, take him away from a place which has always been fatal to his family.
Because it is the place of danger. That is Sir Henry's nature. I fear that unless you can give me some more definite information than this it would be impossible to get him to move.
I would ask you one more question, Miss Stapleton. If you meant no more than this when you first spoke to me, why should you not wish your brother to overhear what you said?
My brother is very anxious to have the Hall inhabited, for he thinks it is for the good of the poor folk upon the moor.
He would be very angry if he knew that I have said anything which might induce Sir Henry to go away. But I have done my duty now and I will say no more.
I must get back, or he will miss me and suspect that I have seen you. Good-bye!" She turned and had disappeared in a few minutes among the scattered boulders, while I, with my soul full of vague fears, pursued my way to Baskerville Hall.
From this point onward I will follow the course of events by transcribing my own letters to Mr. Sherlock Holmes which lie before me on the table.
One page is missing, but otherwise they are exactly as written and show my feelings and suspicions of the moment more accurately than my memory, clear as it is upon these tragic events, can possibly do.
MY DEAR HOLMES,--My previous letters and telegrams have kept you pretty well up to date as to all that has occurred in this most God-forsaken corner of the world.
The longer one stays here the more does the spirit of the moor sink into one's soul, its vastness, and also its grim charm.
When you are once out upon its bosom you have left all traces of modern England behind you, but on the other hand you are conscious everywhere of the homes and the work of the prehistoric people.
On all sides of you as you walk are the houses of these forgotten folk, with their graves and the huge monoliths which are supposed to have marked their temples.
The strange thing is that they should have lived so thickly on what must always have been most unfruitful soil.
I am no antiquarian, but I could imagine that they were some unwarlike and harried race who were forced to accept that which none other would occupy.
All this, however, is foreign to the mission on which you sent me and will probably be very uninteresting to your severely practical mind.
I can still remember your complete indifference as to whether the sun moved round the earth or the earth round the sun.
If you have not had any report within the last few days it is because up to to-day there was nothing of importance to relate.
Then a very surprising circumstance occurred, which I shall tell you in due course. But, first of all, I must keep you in touch with some of the other factors in the situation.
A fortnight has passed since his flight, during which he has not been seen and nothing has been heard of him.
It is surely inconceivable that he could have held out upon the moor during all that time. Of course, so far as his concealment goes there is no difficulty at all.
Any one of these stone huts would give him a hiding-place. But there is nothing to eat unless he were to catch and slaughter one of the moor sheep.
We are four able-bodied men in this household, so that we could take good care of ourselves, but I confess that I have had uneasy moments when I have thought of the Stapletons.
They live miles from any help. There are one maid, an old manservant, the sister, and the brother, the latter not a very strong man.
They would be helpless in the hands of a desperate fellow like this Notting Hill criminal, if he could once effect an entrance.
Both Sir Henry and I were concerned at their situation, and it was suggested that Perkins the groom should go over to sleep there, but Stapleton would not hear of it.
The fact is that our friend, the baronet, begins to display a considerable interest in our fair neighbour.
It is not to be wondered at, for time hangs heavily in this lonely spot to an active man like him, and she is a very fascinating and beautiful woman.
There is something tropical and exotic about her which forms a singular contrast to her cool and unemotional brother.
Yet he also gives the idea of hidden fires. He has certainly a very marked influence over her, for I have seen her continually glance at him as she talked as if seeking approbation for what she said.
I trust that he is kind to her. There is a dry glitter in his eyes, and a firm set of his thin lips, which goes with a positive and possibly a harsh nature.
He came over to call upon Baskerville on that first day, and the very next morning he took us both to show us the spot where the legend of the wicked Hugo is supposed to have had its origin.
It was an excursion of some miles across the moor to a place which is so dismal that it might have suggested the story.
We found a short valley between rugged tors which led to an open, grassy space flecked over with the white cotton grass.
In the middle of it rose two great stones, worn and sharpened at the upper end, until they looked like the huge corroding fangs of some monstrous beast.
He told us of similar cases, where families had suffered from some evil influence, and he left us with the impression that he shared the popular view upon the matter.
On our way back we stayed for lunch at Merripit House, and it was there that Sir Henry made the acquaintance of Miss Stapleton.
From the first moment that he saw her he appeared to be strongly attracted by her, and I am much mistaken if the feeling was not mutual.
He referred to her again and again on our walk home, and since then hardly a day has passed that we have not seen something of the brother and sister.
He is much attached to her, no doubt, and would lead a lonely life without her, but it would seem the height of selfishness if he were to stand in the way of her making so brilliant a marriage.
By the way, your instructions to me never to allow Sir Henry to go out alone will become very much more onerous if a love affair were to be added to our other difficulties.
The other day--Thursday, to be more exact--Dr. Mortimer lunched with us. He has been excavating a barrow at Long Down, and has got a prehistoric skull which fills him with great joy.
It is a long, dismal walk, the Yew Alley, between two high walls of clipped hedge, with a narrow band of grass upon either side.
At the far end is an old tumble-down summer-house. Half-way down is the moor-gate, where the old gentleman left his cigar-ash.
It is a white wooden gate with a latch. Beyond it lies the wide moor. I remembered your theory of the affair and tried to picture all that had occurred.
As the old man stood there he saw something coming across the moor, something which terrified him so that he lost his wits, and ran and ran until he died of sheer horror and exhaustion.
There was the long, gloomy tunnel down which he fled. And from what? A sheep-dog of the moor? Or a spectral hound, black, silent, and monstrous?
Was there a human agency in the matter? Did the pale, watchful Barrymore know more than he cared to say?
One other neighbour I have met since I wrote last. This is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who lives some four miles to the south of us.
He is an elderly man, red-faced, white-haired, and choleric. His passion is for the British law, and he has spent a large fortune in litigation.
He fights for the mere pleasure of fighting and is equally ready to take up either side of a question, so that it is no wonder that he has found it a costly amusement.
He is said to have about seven lawsuits upon his hands at present, which will probably swallow up the remainder of his fortune and so draw his sting and leave him harmless for the future.
Apart from the law he seems a kindly, good-natured person, and I only mention him because you were particular that I should send some description of the people who surround us.
He helps to keep our lives from being monotonous and gives a little comic relief where it is badly needed.
And now, having brought you up to date in the escaped convict, the Stapletons, Dr. Mortimer, and Frankland, of Lafter Hall, let me end on that which is most important and tell you more about the Barrymores, and especially about the surprising development of last night.
First of all about the test telegram, which you sent from London in order to make sure that Barrymore was really here.
I have already explained that the testimony of the postmaster shows that the test was worthless and that we have no proof one way or the other.
I told Sir Henry how the matter stood, and he at once, in his downright fashion, had Barrymore up and asked him whether he had received the telegram himself.
"I could not quite understand the object of your questions this morning, Sir Henry," said he. "I trust that they do not mean that I have done anything to forfeit your confidence?"
Sir Henry had to assure him that it was not so and pacify him by giving him a considerable part of his old wardrobe, the London outfit having now all arrived.
Mrs. Barrymore is of interest to me. She is a heavy, solid person, very limited, intensely respectable, and inclined to be puritanical.
Some deep sorrow gnaws ever at her heart. Sometimes I wonder if she has a guilty memory which haunts her, and sometimes I suspect Barrymore of being a domestic tyrant.
I have always felt that there was something singular and questionable in this man's character, but the adventure of last night brings all my suspicions to a head.
And yet it may seem a small matter in itself. You are aware that I am not a very sound sleeper, and since I have been on guard in this house my slumbers have been lighter than ever.
Last night, about two in the morning, I was aroused by a stealthy step passing my room. I rose, opened my door, and peeped out.
A long black shadow was trailing down the corridor. It was thrown by a man who walked softly down the passage with a candle held in his hand.
He was in shirt and trousers, with no covering to his feet. I could merely see the outline, but his height told me that it was Barrymore.
He walked very slowly and circumspectly, and there was something indescribably guilty and furtive in his whole appearance.
I have told you that the corridor is broken by the balcony which runs round the hall, but that it is resumed upon the farther side.
Now, all these rooms are unfurnished and unoccupied, so that his expedition became more mysterious than ever.
The light shone steadily as if he were standing motionless. I crept down the passage as noiselessly as I could and peeped round the corner of the door.
For some minutes he stood watching intently. Then he gave a deep groan and with an impatient gesture he put out the light.
Instantly I made my way back to my room, and very shortly came the stealthy steps passing once more upon their return journey.
Long afterwards when I had fallen into a light sleep I heard a key turn somewhere in a lock, but I could not tell whence the sound came.
What it all means I cannot guess, but there is some secret business going on in this house of gloom which sooner or later we shall get to the bottom of.
In my last report I ended upon my top note with Barrymore at the window, and now I have quite a budget already which will, unless I am much mistaken, considerably surprise you.
Things have taken a turn which I could not have anticipated. In some ways they have within the last forty-eight hours become much clearer and in some ways they have become more complicated.
Before breakfast on the morning following my adventure I went down the corridor and examined the room in which Barrymore had been on the night before.
The western window through which he had stared so intently has, I noticed, one peculiarity above all other windows in the house--it commands the nearest outlook on the moor.
There is an opening between two trees which enables one from this point of view to look right down upon it, while from all the other windows it is only a distant glimpse which can be obtained.
It follows, therefore, that Barrymore, since only this window would serve the purpose, must have been looking out for something or somebody upon the moor.
The night was very dark, so that I can hardly imagine how he could have hoped to see anyone. It had struck me that it was possible that some love intrigue was on foot.
That opening of the door which I had heard after I had returned to my room might mean that he had gone out to keep some clandestine appointment.
So I reasoned with myself in the morning, and I tell you the direction of my suspicions, however much the result may have shown that they were unfounded.
But whatever the true explanation of Barrymore's movements might be, I felt that the responsibility of keeping them to myself until I could explain them was more than I could bear.
I had an interview with the baronet in his study after breakfast, and I told him all that I had seen.
"I knew that Barrymore walked about nights, and I had a mind to speak to him about it," said he. "Two or three times I have heard his steps in the passage, coming and going, just about the hour you name."
Perhaps he does. If so, we should be able to shadow him, and see what it is that he is after. I wonder what your friend Holmes would do, if he were here.
The man is rather deaf, and in any case we must take our chance of that. We'll sit up in my room to-night and wait until he passes.
Sir Henry rubbed his hands with pleasure, and it was evident that he hailed the adventure as a relief to his somewhat quiet life upon the moor.
The baronet has been in communication with the architect who prepared the plans for Sir Charles, and with a contractor from London, so that we may expect great changes to begin here soon.
There have been decorators and furnishers up from Plymouth, and it is evident that our friend has large ideas, and means to spare no pains or expense to restore the grandeur of his family.
When the house is renovated and refurnished, all that he will need will be a wife to make it complete.
And yet the course of true love does not run quite as smoothly as one would under the circumstances expect.
To-day, for example, its surface was broken by a very unexpected ripple, which has caused our friend considerable perplexity and annoyance.
After the conversation which I have quoted about Barrymore, Sir Henry put on his hat and prepared to go out.
Well, you know what my instructions are. I am sorry to intrude, but you heard how earnestly Holmes insisted that I should not leave you, and especially that you should not go alone upon the moor.
"My dear fellow," said he, "Holmes, with all his wisdom, did not foresee some things which have happened since I have been on the moor.
You understand me? I am sure that you are the last man in the world who would wish to be a spoil-sport.
It put me in a most awkward position. I was at a loss what to say or what to do, and before I had made up my mind he picked up his cane and was gone.
But when I came to think the matter over my conscience reproached me bitterly for having on any pretext allowed him to go out of my sight.
I imagined what my feelings would be if I had to return to you and to confess that some misfortune had occurred through my disregard for your instructions.
I assure you my cheeks flushed at the very thought. It might not even now be too late to overtake him, so I set off at once in the direction of Merripit House.
I hurried along the road at the top of my speed without seeing anything of Sir Henry, until I came to the point where the moor path branches off.
There, fearing that perhaps I had come in the wrong direction after all, I mounted a hill from which I could command a view--the same hill which is cut into the dark quarry.
Thence I saw him at once. He was on the moor path, about a quarter of a mile off, and a lady was by his side who could only be Miss Stapleton.
It was clear that there was already an understanding between them and that they had met by appointment.
To act the spy upon a friend was a hateful task. Still, I could see no better course than to observe him from the hill, and to clear my conscience by confessing to him afterwards what I had done.
It is true that if any sudden danger had threatened him I was too far away to be of use, and yet I am sure that you will agree with me that the position was very difficult, and that there was nothing more which I could do.
Our friend, Sir Henry, and the lady had halted on the path and were standing deeply absorbed in their conversation, when I was suddenly aware that I was not the only witness of their interview.
A wisp of green floating in the air caught my eye, and another glance showed me that it was carried on a stick by a man who was moving among the broken ground.
It was Stapleton with his butterfly-net. He was very much closer to the pair than I was, and he appeared to be moving in their direction.
At this instant Sir Henry suddenly drew Miss Stapleton to his side. His arm was round her, but it seemed to me that she was straining away from him with her face averted.
He stooped his head to hers, and she raised one hand as if in protest. Next moment I saw them spring apart and turn hurriedly round.
Stapleton was the cause of the interruption. He was running wildly towards them, his absurd net dangling behind him.
The naturalist's angry gestures showed that the lady was included in his displeasure. The baronet stood for a minute looking after them, and then he walked slowly back the way that he had come, his head hanging, the very picture of dejection.
What all this meant I could not imagine, but I was deeply ashamed to have witnessed so intimate a scene without my friend's knowledge.
I ran down the hill therefore and met the baronet at the bottom. His face was flushed with anger and his brows were wrinkled, like one who is at his wit's ends what to do.
"Halloa, Watson! Where have you dropped from?" said he. "You don't mean to say that you came after me in spite of all?"
I explained everything to him: how I had found it impossible to remain behind, how I had followed him, and how I had witnessed all that had occurred.
For an instant his eyes blazed at me, but my frankness disarmed his anger, and he broke at last into a rather rueful laugh.
I dare say not. I always thought him sane enough until to-day, but you can take it from me that either he or I ought to be in a strait-jacket.
What's the matter with me, anyhow? You've lived near me for some weeks, Watson. Tell me straight, now!
He can't object to my worldly position, so it must be myself that he has this down on. What has he against me?
I never hurt man or woman in my life that I know of. And yet he would not so much as let me touch the tips of her fingers.
She was glad to meet me, but when she did it was not love that she would talk about, and she wouldn't have let me talk about it either if she could have stopped it.
She kept coming back to it that this was a place of danger, and that she would never be happy until I had left it.
I told her that since I had seen her I was in no hurry to leave it, and that if she really wanted me to go, the only way to work it was for her to arrange to go with me.
With that I offered in as many words to marry her, but before she could answer, down came this brother of hers, running at us with a face on him like a madman.
He was just white with rage, and those light eyes of his were blazing with fury. What was I doing with the lady?
How dared I offer her attentions which were distasteful to her? Did I think that because I was a baronet I could do what I liked?
That seemed to make the matter no better, so then I lost my temper too, and I answered him rather more hotly than I should perhaps, considering that she was standing by.
So it ended by his going off with her, as you saw, and here am I as badly puzzled a man as any in this county.
That his advances should be rejected so brusquely without any reference to the lady's own wishes, and that the lady should accept the situation without protest, is very amazing.
However, our conjectures were set at rest by a visit from Stapleton himself that very afternoon. He had come to offer apologies for his rudeness of the morning, and after a long private interview with Sir Henry in his study, the upshot of their conversation was that the breach is quite healed, and that we are to dine at Merripit House next Friday as a sign of it.
"I don't say now that he isn't a crazy man," said Sir Henry; "I can't forget the look in his eyes when he ran at me this morning, but I must allow that no man could make a more handsome apology than he has done."
His sister is everything in his life, he says. That is natural enough, and I am glad that he should understand her value.
They have always been together, and according to his account he has been a very lonely man with only her as a companion, so that the thought of losing her was really terrible to him.
So there is one of our small mysteries cleared up. It is something to have touched bottom anywhere in this bog in which we are floundering.
We know now why Stapleton looked with disfavour upon his sister's suitor--even when that suitor was so eligible a one as Sir Henry.
Congratulate me, my dear Holmes, and tell me that I have not disappointed you as an agent--that you do not regret the confidence which you showed in me when you sent me down.
I have said "by one night's work," but, in truth, it was by two nights' work, for on the first we drew entirely blank.
I sat up with Sir Henry in his rooms until nearly three o'clock in the morning, but no sound of any sort did we hear except the chiming clock upon the stairs.
It was a most melancholy vigil, and ended by each of us falling asleep in our chairs. Fortunately we were not discouraged, and we determined to try again.
One struck, and two, and we had almost for the second time given it up in despair, when in an instant we both sat bolt upright in our chairs, with all our weary senses keenly on the alert once more.
Very stealthily we heard it pass along until it died away in the distance. Then the baronet gently opened his door and we set out in pursuit.
Already our man had gone round the gallery, and the corridor was all in darkness. Softly we stole along until we had come into the other wing.
We were just in time to catch a glimpse of the tall, black-bearded figure, his shoulders rounded, as he tip-toed down the passage.
Then he passed through the same door as before, and the light of the candle framed it in the darkness and shot one single yellow beam across the gloom of the corridor.
We shuffled cautiously towards it, trying every plank before we dared to put our whole weight upon it.
We had taken the precaution of leaving our boots behind us, but, even so, the old boards snapped and creaked beneath our tread.
Sometimes it seemed impossible that he should fail to hear our approach. However, the man is fortunately rather deaf, and he was entirely preoccupied in that which he was doing.
When at last we reached the door and peeped through we found him crouching at the window, candle in hand, his white, intent face pressed against the pane, exactly as I had seen him two nights before.
We had arranged no plan of campaign, but the baronet is a man to whom the most direct way is always the most natural.
He walked into the room, and as he did so Barrymore sprang up from the window with a sharp hiss of his breath and stood, livid and trembling, before us.
His dark eyes, glaring out of the white mask of his face, were full of horror and astonishment as he gazed from Sir Henry to me.
"Nothing, sir." His agitation was so great that he could hardly speak, and the shadows sprang up and down from the shaking of his candle.
"Look here, Barrymore," said Sir Henry, sternly; "we have made up our minds to have the truth out of you, so it will save you trouble to tell it sooner rather than later.
The fellow looked at us in a helpless way, and he wrung his hands together like one who is in the last extremity of doubt and misery.
Don't ask me, Sir Henry--don't ask me! I give you my word, sir, that it is not my secret, and that I cannot tell it.
"He must have been holding it as a signal," said I. "Let us see if there is any answer." I held it as he had done, and stared out into the darkness of the night.
Vaguely I could discern the black bank of the trees and the lighter expanse of the moor, for the moon was behind the clouds.
And then I gave a cry of exultation, for a tiny pin-point of yellow light had suddenly transfixed the dark veil, and glowed steadily in the centre of the black square framed by the window.
"Move your light across the window, Watson!" cried the baronet. "See, the other moves also! Now, you rascal, do you deny that it is a signal?
And you go in disgrace. By thunder, you may well be ashamed of yourself. Your family has lived with mine for over a hundred years under this roof, and here I find you deep in some dark plot against me.
"No, no, sir; no, not against you!" It was a woman's voice, and Mrs. Barrymore, paler and more horror-struck than her husband, was standing at the door.
Her bulky figure in a shawl and skirt might have been comic were it not for the intensity of feeling upon her face.
Oh, John, John, have I brought you to this? It is my doing, Sir Henry--all mine. He has done nothing except for my sake and because I asked him.
My unhappy brother is starving on the moor. We cannot let him perish at our very gates. The light is a signal to him that food is ready for him, and his light out yonder is to show the spot to which to bring it.
"That's the truth, sir," said Barrymore. "I said that it was not my secret and that I could not tell it to you.
This, then, was the explanation of the stealthy expeditions at night and the light at the window. Sir Henry and I both stared at the woman in amazement.
Was it possible that this stolidly respectable person was of the same blood as one of the most notorious criminals in the country?
Then as he grew older he met wicked companions, and the devil entered into him until he broke my mother's heart and dragged our name in the dirt.
But every second night we made sure if he was still there by putting a light in the window, and if there was an answer my husband took out some bread and meat to him.
Every day we hoped that he was gone, but as long as he was there we could not desert him. That is the whole truth, as I am an honest Christian woman, and you will see that if there is blame in the matter it does not lie with my husband, but with me, for whose sake he has done all that he has.
Well, I cannot blame you for standing by your own wife. Forget what I have said. Go to your room, you two, and we shall talk further about this matter in the morning.
When they were gone we looked out of the window again. Sir Henry had flung it open, and the cold night wind beat in upon our faces.
Well, it cannot be far if Barrymore had to carry out the food to it. And he is waiting, this villain, beside that candle.
The same thought had crossed my own mind. It was not as if the Barrymores had taken us into their confidence.
Their secret had been forced from them. The man was a danger to the community, an unmitigated scoundrel for whom there was neither pity nor excuse.
We were only doing our duty in taking this chance of putting him back where he could do no harm. With his brutal and violent nature, others would have to pay the price if we held our hands.
Any night, for example, our neighbours the Stapletons might be attacked by him, and it may have been the thought of this which made Sir Henry so keen upon the adventure.
Then get your revolver and put on your boots. The sooner we start the better, as the fellow may put out his light and be off.
In five minutes we were outside the door, starting upon our expedition. We hurried through the dark shrubbery, amid the dull moaning of the autumn wind and the rustle of the falling leaves.
We must close in on him rapidly, for he is said to be a desperate fellow. We shall take him by surprise and have him at our mercy before he can resist.
"I say, Watson," said the baronet, "what would Holmes say to this? How about that hour of darkness in which the power of evil is exalted?"
As if in answer to his words there rose suddenly out of the vast gloom of the moor that strange cry which I had already heard upon the borders of the great Grimpen Mire.
It came with the wind through the silence of the night, a long, deep mutter, then a rising howl, and then the sad moan in which it died away.
Again and again it sounded, the whole air throbbing with it, strident, wild, and menacing. The baronet caught my sleeve and his face glimmered white through the darkness.
It died away, and an absolute silence closed in upon us. We stood straining our ears, but nothing came.
My blood ran cold in my veins, for there was a break in his voice which told of the sudden horror which had seized him.
Well, it was up there. Come now, Watson, didn't you think yourself that it was the cry of a hound? I am not a child.
No, no, it was a hound. My God, can there be some truth in all these stories? Is it possible that I am really in danger from so dark a cause?
And yet it was one thing to laugh about it in London, and it is another to stand out here in the darkness of the moor and to hear such a cry as that.
And my uncle! There was the footprint of the hound beside him as he lay. It all fits together. I don't think that I am a coward, Watson, but that sound seemed to freeze my very blood.
No, by thunder; we have come out to get our man, and we will do it. We after the convict, and a hell-hound, as likely as not, after us.
We stumbled slowly along in the darkness, with the black loom of the craggy hills around us, and the yellow speck of light burning steadily in front.
A boulder of granite concealed our approach, and crouching behind it we gazed over it at the signal light.
It was strange to see this single candle burning there in the middle of the moor, with no sign of life near it--just the one straight yellow flame and the gleam of the rock on each side of it.
Foul with mire, with a bristling beard, and hung with matted hair, it might well have belonged to one of those old savages who dwelt in the burrows on the hillsides.
The light beneath him was reflected in his small, cunning eyes which peered fiercely to right and left through the darkness, like a crafty and savage animal who has heard the steps of the hunters.
Any instant he might dash out the light and vanish in the darkness. I sprang forward therefore, and Sir Henry did the same.
At the same moment the convict screamed out a curse at us and hurled a rock which splintered up against the boulder which had sheltered us.
I caught one glimpse of his short, squat, strongly- built figure as he sprang to his feet and turned to run.
A lucky long shot of my revolver might have crippled him, but I had brought it only to defend myself if attacked, and not to shoot an unarmed man who was running away.
We were both swift runners and in fairly good training, but we soon found that we had no chance of overtaking him.
We saw him for a long time in the moonlight until he was only a small speck moving swiftly among the boulders upon the side of a distant hill.
We ran and ran until we were completely blown, but the space between us grew ever wider. Finally we stopped and sat panting on two rocks, while we watched him disappearing in the distance.
And it was at this moment that there occurred a most strange and unexpected thing. We had risen from our rocks and were turning to go home, having abandoned the hopeless chase.
The moon was low upon the right, and the jagged pinnacle of a granite tor stood up against the lower curve of its silver disc.
There, outlined as black as an ebony statue on that shining back-ground, I saw the figure of a man upon the tor.
Do not think that it was a delusion, Holmes. I assure you that I have never in my life seen anything more clearly.
He might have been the very spirit of that terrible place. It was not the convict. This man was far from the place where the latter had disappeared.
Besides, he was a much taller man. With a cry of surprise I pointed him out to the baronet, but in the instant during which I had turned to grasp his arm the man was gone.
There was the sharp pinnacle of granite still cutting the lower edge of the moon, but its peak bore no trace of that silent and motionless figure.
He had not seen this lonely man upon the tor and could not feel the thrill which his strange presence and his commanding attitude had given to me.
"A warder, no doubt," said he. "The moor has been thick with them since this fellow escaped." Well, perhaps his explanation may be the right one, but I should like to have some further proof of it.
Such are the adventures of last night, and you must acknowledge, my dear Holmes, that I have done you very well in the matter of a report.
We are certainly making some progress. So far as the Barrymores go we have found the motive of their actions, and that has cleared up the situation very much.
But the moor with its mysteries and its strange inhabitants remains as inscrutable as ever. Perhaps in my next I may be able to throw some light upon this also.
Best of all would it be if you could come down to us. In any case you will hear from me again in the course of the next few days.
So far I have been able to quote from the reports which I have forwarded during these early days to Sherlock Holmes.
Now, however, I have arrived at a point in my narrative where I am compelled to abandon this method and to trust once more to my recollections, aided by the diary which I kept at the time.
A few extracts from the latter will carry me on to those scenes which are indelibly fixed in every detail upon my memory.
I proceed, then, from the morning which followed our abortive chase of the convict and our other strange experiences upon the moor.
It is melancholy outside and in. The baronet is in a black reaction after the excitements of the night.
I am conscious myself of a weight at my heart and a feeling of impending danger--ever present danger, which is the more terrible because I am unable to define it.
And have I not cause for such a feeling? Consider the long sequence of incidents which have all pointed to some sinister influence which is at work around us.
Twice I have with my own ears heard the sound which resembled the distant baying of a hound. It is incredible, impossible, that it should really be outside the ordinary laws of nature.
A spectral hound which leaves material footmarks and fills the air with its howling is surely not to be thought of.
Stapleton may fall in with such a superstition, and Mortimer also; but if I have one quality upon earth it is common-sense, and nothing will persuade me to believe in such a thing.
To do so would be to descend to the level of these poor peasants, who are not content with a mere fiend dog but must needs describe him with hell-fire shooting from his mouth and eyes.
Holmes would not listen to such fancies, and I am his agent. But facts are facts, and I have twice heard this crying upon the moor.
Suppose that there were really some huge hound loose upon it; that would go far to explain everything.
But where could such a hound lie concealed, where did it get its food, where did it come from, how was it that no one saw it by day?
This at least was real, but it might have been the work of a protecting friend as easily as of an enemy.
Where is that friend or enemy now? Has he remained in London, or has he followed us down here? Could he--could he be the stranger whom I saw upon the tor?
It is true that I have had only the one glance at him, and yet there are some things to which I am ready to swear.
He is no one whom I have seen down here, and I have now met all the neighbours. The figure was far taller than that of Stapleton, far thinner than that of Frankland.
Barrymore it might possibly have been, but we had left him behind us, and I am certain that he could not have followed us.
A stranger then is still dogging us, just as a stranger dogged us in London. We have never shaken him off.
If I could lay my hands upon that man, then at last we might find ourselves at the end of all our difficulties.
My first impulse was to tell Sir Henry all my plans. My second and wisest one is to play my own game and speak as little as possible to anyone.
He is silent and distrait. His nerves have been strangely shaken by that sound upon the moor. I will say nothing to add to his anxieties, but I will take my own steps to attain my own end.
We had a small scene this morning after breakfast. Barrymore asked leave to speak with Sir Henry, and they were closeted in his study some little time.
Sitting in the billiard-room I more than once heard the sound of voices raised, and I had a pretty good idea what the point was which was under discussion.
"Barrymore considers that he has a grievance," he said. "He thinks that it was unfair on our part to hunt his brother-in-law down when he, of his own free will, had told us the secret."
"If you had told us of your own free will it would have been a different thing," said the baronet, "you only told us, or rather your wife only told us, when it was forced from you and you could not help yourself."
The man is a public danger. There are lonely houses scattered over the moor, and he is a fellow who would stick at nothing.
You only want to get a glimpse of his face to see that. Look at Mr. Stapleton's house, for example, with no one but himself to defend it.
He'll break into no house, sir. I give you my solemn word upon that. But he will never trouble anyone in this country again.
I assure you, Sir Henry, that in a very few days the necessary arrangements will have been made and he will be on his way to South America.
For God's sake, sir, I beg of you not to let the police know that he is still on the moor. They have given up the chase there, and he can lie quiet until the ship is ready for him.
You can't tell on him without getting my wife and me into trouble. I beg you, sir, to say nothing to the police.
I shrugged my shoulders. "If he were safely out of the country it would relieve the tax-payer of a burden."
He would not do anything so mad, sir. We have provided him with all that he can want. To commit a crime would be to show where he was hiding.
God bless you, sir, and thank you from my heart! It would have killed my poor wife had he been taken again.
I guess we are aiding and abetting a felony, Watson? But, after what we have heard I don't feel as if I could give the man up, so there is an end of it.
But that morning, as it chanced, there was only this one letter, so I took the more notice of it. It was from Coombe Tracey, and it was addressed in a woman's hand.
The greater part of it was charred to pieces, but one little slip, the end of a page, hung together, and the writing could still be read, though it was gray on a black ground.
It seemed to us to be a postscript at the end of the letter, and it said: 'Please, please, as you are a gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o clock.
Well, sir, I took no particular notice of his letters. I should not have noticed this one, only it happened to come alone.
No, sir. No more than you have. But I expect if we could lay our hands upon that lady we should know more about Sir Charles's death.
Well, sir, it was immediately after that our own trouble came to us. And then again, sir, we were both of us very fond of Sir Charles, as we well might be considering all that he has done for us.
To rake this up couldn't help our poor master, and it's well to go carefully when there's a lady in the case.
Well, sir, I thought no good could come of it. But now you have been kind to us, and I feel as if it would be treating you unfairly not to tell you all that I know about the matter.
"Very good, Barrymore; you can go." When the butler had left us Sir Henry turned to me. "Well, Watson, what do you think of this new light?"
So I think. But if we can only trace L. L. it should clear up the whole business. We have gained that much.
We know that there is someone who has the facts if we can only find her. What do you think we should do?
Let Holmes know all about it at once. It will give him the clue for which he has been seeking. I am much mistaken if it does not bring him down.
No doubt his blackmailing case is absorbing all his faculties. And yet this new factor must surely arrest his attention and renew his interest.
OCTOBER 17TH.--All day to-day the rain poured down, rustling on the ivy and dripping from the eaves. I thought of the convict out upon the bleak, cold, shelterless moor.
Poor devil! Whatever his crimes, he has suffered something to atone for them. And then I thought of that other one--the face in the cab, the figure against the moon.
Rain squalls drifted across their russet face, and the heavy, slate-coloured clouds hung low over the landscape, trailing in gray wreaths down the sides of the fantastic hills.
In the distant hollow on the left, half hidden by the mist, the two thin towers of Baskerville Hall rose above the trees.
They were the only signs of human life which I could see, save only those prehistoric huts which lay thickly upon the slopes of the hills.
As I walked back I was overtaken by Dr. Mortimer driving in his dog-cart over a rough moorland track which led from the outlying farmhouse of Foulmire.
He has been very attentive to us, and hardly a day has passed that he has not called at the Hall to see how we were getting on.
He insisted upon my climbing into his dog-cart, and he gave me a lift homeward. I found him much troubled over the disappearance of his little spaniel.
It had wandered on to the moor and had never come back. I gave him such consolation as I might, but I thought of the pony on the Grimpen Mire, and I do not fancy that he will see his little dog again.
"By the way, Mortimer," said I as we jolted along the rough road, "I suppose there are few people living within driving distance of this whom you do not know?"
"No," said he. "There are a few gipsies and labouring folk for whom I can't answer, but among the farmers or gentry there is no one whose initials are those.
Wait a bit though," he added after a pause. "There is Laura Lyons--her initials are L. L.--but she lives in Coombe Tracey."
Exactly. She married an artist named Lyons, who came sketching on the moor. He proved to be a blackguard and deserted her.
I fancy old Frankland allows her a pittance, but it cannot be more, for his own affairs are considerably involved.
Whatever she may have deserved one could not allow her to go hopelessly to the bad. Her story got about, and several of the people here did something to enable her to earn an honest living.
Stapleton did for one, and Sir Charles for another. I gave a trifle myself. It was to set her up in a typewriting business.
He wanted to know the object of my inquiries, but I managed to satisfy his curiosity without telling him too much, for there is no reason why we should take anyone into our confidence.
I have only one other incident to record upon this tempestuous and melancholy day. This was my conversation with Barrymore just now, which gives me one more strong card which I can play in due time.
I don't know, sir. I hope to heaven that he has gone, for he has brought nothing but trouble here! I've not heard of him since I left out food for him last, and that was three days ago.
Selden told me of him, sir, a week ago or more. He's in hiding, too, but he's not a convict as far as I can make out.
I don't like it, Dr. Watson--I tell you straight, sir, that I don't like it." He spoke with a sudden passion of earnestness.
Now, listen to me, Barrymore! I have no interest in this matter but that of your master. I have come here with no object except to help him.
Barrymore hesitated for a moment, as if he regretted his outburst, or found it difficult to express his own feelings in words.
"It's all these goings-on, sir," he cried at last, waving his hand towards the rain-lashed window which faced the moor.
There's foul play somewhere, and there's black villainy brewing, to that I'll swear! Very glad I should be, sir, to see Sir Henry on his way back to London again!
Look at Sir Charles's death! That was bad enough, for all that the coroner said. Look at the noises on the moor at night.
There's not a man would cross it after sundown if he was paid for it. Look at this stranger hiding out yonder, and watching and waiting!
What's he waiting for? What does it mean? It means no good to anyone of the name of Baskerville, and very glad I shall be to be quit of it all on the day that Sir Henry's new servants are ready to take over the Hall.
"But about this stranger," said I. "Can you tell me anything about him? What did Selden say? Did he find out where he hid, or what he was doing?"
He saw him once or twice, but he is a deep one, and gives nothing away. At first he thought that he was the police, but soon he found that he had some lay of his own.
Selden found out that he has got a lad who works for him and brings him all he needs. I dare say he goes to Coombe Tracey for what he wants.
It is a wild night indoors, and what must it be in a stone hut upon the moor. What passion of hatred can it be which leads a man to lurk in such a place at such a time!
And what deep and earnest purpose can he have which calls for such a trial! There, in that hut upon the moor, seems to lie the very centre of that problem which has vexed me so sorely.
I swear that another day shall not have passed before I have done all that man can do to reach the heart of the mystery.
The incidents of the next few days are indelibly graven upon my recollection, and I can tell them without reference to the notes made at the time.
With these two facts in my possession I felt that either my intelligence or my courage must be deficient if I could not throw some further light upon these dark places.
I had no opportunity to tell the baronet what I had learned about Mrs. Lyons upon the evening before, for Dr. Mortimer remained with him at cards until it was very late.
At breakfast, however, I informed him about my discovery, and asked him whether he would care to accompany me to Coombe Tracey.
At first he was very eager to come, but on second thoughts it seemed to both of us that if I went alone the results might be better.
The more formal we made the visit the less information we might obtain. I left Sir Henry behind, therefore, not without some prickings of conscience, and drove off upon my new quest.
When I reached Coombe Tracey I told Perkins to put up the horses, and I made inquiries for the lady whom I had come to interrogate.
Her face fell, however, when she saw that I was a stranger, and she sat down again and asked me the object of my visit.
But these, of course, are after-thoughts. At the moment I was simply conscious that I was in the presence of a very handsome woman, and that she was asking me the reasons for my visit.
"I have the pleasure," said I, "of knowing your father." It was a clumsy introduction, and the lady made me feel it.
"There is nothing in common between my father and me," she said. "I owe him nothing, and his friends are not mine.
If it were not for the late Sir Charles Baskerville and some other kind hearts I might have starved for all that my father cared.
"What can I tell you about him?" she asked, and her fingers played nervously over the stops of her typewriter.
I have already said that I owe a great deal to his kindness. If I am able to support myself it is largely due to the interest which he took in my unhappy situation.
The object is to avoid a public scandal. It is better that I should ask them here than that the matter should pass outside our control.
She was silent and her face was still very pale. At last she looked up with something reckless and defiant in her manner.
Yes, once or twice, when he came into Coombe Tracey. He was a very retiring man, and he preferred to do good by stealth.
But if you saw him so seldom and wrote so seldom, how did he know enough about your affairs to be able to help you, as you say that he has done?
There were several gentlemen who knew my sad history and united to help me. One was Mr. Stapleton, a neighbour and intimate friend of Sir Charles's.
I knew already that Sir Charles Baskerville had made Stapleton his almoner upon several occasions, so the lady's statement bore the impress of truth upon it.
The flush had faded in an instant, and a deathly face was before me. Her dry lips could not speak the "No" which I saw rather than heard.
"Surely your memory deceives you," said I. "I could even quote a passage of your letter. It ran 'Please, please, as you are a gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o'clock.'"
You do Sir Charles an injustice. He did burn the letter. But sometimes a letter may be legible even when burned.
"Yes, I did write it," she cried, pouring out her soul in a torrent of words. "I did write it. Why should I deny it?
I have no reason to be ashamed of it. I wished him to help me. I believed that if I had an interview I could gain his help, so I asked him to meet me.
Because I had only just learned that he was going to London next day and might be away for months. There were reasons why I could not get there earlier.
You acknowledge then that you made an appointment with Sir Charles at the very hour and place at which he met his death, but you deny that you kept the appointment.
If I have to call in the aid of the police you will find how seriously you are compromised. If your position is innocent, why did you in the first instance deny having written to Sir Charles upon that date?
Because I feared that some false conclusion might be drawn from it and that I might find myself involved in a scandal.
I quoted the postscript. The letter had, as I said, been burned and it was not all legible. I ask you once again why it was that you were so pressing that Sir Charles should destroy this letter which he received on the day of his death.
I will tell you, then. If you have heard anything of my unhappy history you will know that I made a rash marriage and had reason to regret it.
My life has been one incessant persecution from a husband whom I abhor. The law is upon his side, and every day I am faced by the possibility that he may force me to live with him.
At the time that I wrote this letter to Sir Charles I had learned that there was a prospect of my regaining my freedom if certain expenses could be met.
It meant everything to me--peace of mind, happiness, self-respect--everything. I knew Sir Charles's generosity, and I thought that if he heard the story from my own lips he would help me.
The woman's story hung coherently together, and all my questions were unable to shake it. I could only check it by finding if she had, indeed, instituted divorce proceedings against her husband at or about the time of the tragedy.
Such an excursion could not be kept secret. The probability was, therefore, that she was telling the truth, or, at least, a part of the truth.
I came away baffled and disheartened. Once again I had reached that dead wall which seemed to be built across every path by which I tried to get at the object of my mission.
And yet the more I thought of the lady's face and of her manner the more I felt that something was being held back from me.
Why should she turn so pale? Why should she fight against every admission until it was forced from her?
Why should she have been so reticent at the time of the tragedy? Surely the explanation of all this could not be as innocent as she would have me believe.
For the moment I could proceed no farther in that direction, but must turn back to that other clue which was to be sought for among the stone huts upon the moor.
And that was a most vague direction. I realized it as I drove back and noted how hill after hill showed traces of the ancient people.
Barrymore's only indication had been that the stranger lived in one of these abandoned huts, and many hundreds of them are scattered throughout the length and breadth of the moor.
But I had my own experience for a guide since it had shown me the man himself standing upon the summit of the Black Tor.
That then should be the centre of my search. From there I should explore every hut upon the moor until I lighted upon the right one.
If this man were inside it I should find out from his own lips, at the point of my revolver if necessary, who he was and why he had dogged us so long.
He might slip away from us in the crowd of Regent Street, but it would puzzle him to do so upon the lonely moor.
On the other hand, if I should find the hut and its tenant should not be within it I must remain there, however long the vigil, until he returned.
Holmes had missed him in London. It would indeed be a triumph for me if I could run him to earth, where my master had failed.
Luck had been against us again and again in this inquiry, but now at last it came to my aid. And the messenger of good fortune was none other than Mr. Frankland, who was standing, gray-whiskered and red-faced, outside the gate of his garden, which opened on to the high road along which I travelled.
"Good-day, Dr. Watson," cried he with unwonted good humour, "you must really give your horses a rest, and come in to have a glass of wine and to congratulate me."
I alighted and sent a message to Sir Henry that I should walk over in time for dinner. Then I followed Frankland into his dining-room.
"It is a great day for me, sir--one of the red-letter days of my life," he cried with many chuckles. "I have brought off a double event.
I mean to teach them in these parts that law is law, and that there is a man here who does not fear to invoke it.
I have established a right of way through the centre of old Middleton's park, slap across it, sir, within a hundred yards of his own front door.
What do you think of that? We'll teach these magnates that they cannot ride roughshod over the rights of the commoners, confound them!
Both cases decided, Dr. Watson, and both in my favour. I haven't had such a day since I had Sir John Morland for trespass, because he shot in his own warren.
Look it up in the books, sir. It will repay reading--Frankland v. Morland, Court of Queen's Bench. It cost me 200 pounds, but I got my verdict.
None, sir, none. I am proud to say that I had no interest in the matter. I act entirely from a sense of public duty.
I have no doubt, for example, that the Fernworthy people will burn me in effigy to-night. I told the police last time they did it that they should stop these disgraceful exhibitions.
The County Constabulary is in a scandalous state, sir, and it has not afforded me the protection to which I am entitled.
The case of Frankland v. Regina will bring the matter before the attention of the public. I told them that they would have occasion to regret their treatment of me, and already my words have come true.
Because I could tell them what they are dying to know; but nothing would induce me to help the rascals in any way.
I had been casting round for some excuse by which I could get away from his gossip, but now I began to wish to hear more of it.
I had seen enough of the contrary nature of the old sinner to understand that any strong sign of interest would be the surest way to stop his confidences.
I may not know exactly where he is, but I am quite sure that I could help the police to lay their hands on him.
Has it never struck you that the way to catch that man was to find out where he got his food, and so trace it to him?
He certainly seemed to be getting uncomfortably near the truth. "No doubt," said I; "but how do you know that he is anywhere upon the moor?"
My heart sank for Barrymore. It was a serious thing to be in the power of this spiteful old busybody.
You'll be surprised to hear that his food is taken to him by a child. I see him every day through my telescope upon the roof.
He passes along the same path at the same hour, and to whom should he be going except to the convict?
Here was luck indeed! And yet I suppressed all appearance of interest. A child! Barrymore had said that our unknown was supplied by a boy.
It was on his track, and not upon the convict's, that Frankland had stumbled. If I could get his knowledge it might save me a long and weary hunt.
I should say that it was much more likely that it was the son of one of the moorland shepherds taking out his father's dinner.
The least appearance of opposition struck fire out of the old autocrat. His eyes looked malignantly at me, and his gray whiskers bristled like those of an angry cat.
"Indeed, sir!" said he, pointing out over the wide-stretching moor. "Do you see that Black Tor over yonder?
Well, do you see the low hill beyond with the thornbush upon it? It is the stoniest part of the whole moor.
Is that a place where a shepherd would be likely to take his station? Your suggestion, sir, is a most absurd one.
I meekly answered that I had spoken without knowing all the facts. My submission pleased him and led him to further confidences.
You may be sure, sir, that I have very good grounds before I come to an opinion. I have seen the boy again and again with his bundle.
Every day, and sometimes twice a day, I have been able--but wait a moment, Dr. Watson. Do my eyes deceive me, or is there at the present moment something moving upon that hill- side?
It was several miles off, but I could distinctly see a small dark dot against the dull green and gray.
"Come, sir, come!" cried Frankland, rushing upstairs. "You will see with your own eyes and judge for yourself."
The telescope, a formidable instrument mounted upon a tripod, stood upon the flat leads of the house.
There he was, sure enough, a small urchin with a little bundle upon his shoulder, toiling slowly up the hill.
When he reached the crest I saw the ragged uncouth figure outlined for an instant against the cold blue sky.
He looked round him with a furtive and stealthy air, as one who dreads pursuit. Then he vanished over the hill.
And what the errand is even a county constable could guess. But not one word shall they have from me, and I bind you to secrecy also, Dr. Watson.
They have treated me shamefully--shamefully. When the facts come out in Frankland v. Regina I venture to think that a thrill of indignation will run through the country.
Nothing would induce me to help the police in any way. For all they cared it might have been me, instead of my effigy, which these rascals burned at the stake.
But I resisted all his solicitations and succeeded in dissuading him from his announced intention of walking home with me.
I kept the road as long as his eye was on me, and then I struck off across the moor and made for the stony hill over which the boy had disappeared.
Everything was working in my favour, and I swore that it should not be through lack of energy or perseverance that I should miss the chance which fortune had thrown in my way.
The sun was already sinking when I reached the summit of the hill, and the long slopes beneath me were all golden-green on one side and gray shadow on the other.
A haze lay low upon the farthest sky-line, out of which jutted the fantastic shapes of Belliver and Vixen Tor.
Over the wide expanse there was no sound and no movement. One great gray bird, a gull or curlew, soared aloft in the blue heaven.
He and I seemed to be the only living things between the huge arch of the sky and the desert beneath it.
The barren scene, the sense of loneliness, and the mystery and urgency of my task all struck a chill into my heart.
My heart leaped within me as I saw it. This must be the burrow where the stranger lurked. At last my foot was on the threshold of his hiding place--his secret was within my grasp.
As I approached the hut, walking as warily as Stapleton would do when with poised net he drew near the settled butterfly, I satisfied myself that the place had indeed been used as a habitation.
A vague pathway among the boulders led to the dilapidated opening which served as a door. All was silent within.
The unknown might be lurking there, or he might be prowling on the moor. My nerves tingled with the sense of adventure.
Throwing aside my cigarette, I closed my hand upon the butt of my revolver and, walking swiftly up to the door, I looked in.
But there were ample signs that I had not come upon a false scent. This was certainly where the man lived.
Some blankets rolled in a waterproof lay upon that very stone slab upon which Neolithic man had once slumbered.
The ashes of a fire were heaped in a rude grate. Beside it lay some cooking utensils and a bucket half-full of water.
In the middle of the hut a flat stone served the purpose of a table, and upon this stood a small cloth bundle--the same, no doubt, which I had seen through the telescope upon the shoulder of the boy.
For a minute I stood there with the paper in my hands thinking out the meaning of this curt message. It was I, then, and not Sir Henry, who was being dogged by this secret man.
He had not followed me himself, but he had set an agent--the boy, perhaps--upon my track, and this was his report.
Possibly I had taken no step since I had been upon the moor which had not been observed and reported.
Always there was this feeling of an unseen force, a fine net drawn round us with infinite skill and delicacy, holding us so lightly that it was only at some supreme moment that one realized that one was indeed entangled in its meshes.
When I thought of the heavy rains and looked at the gaping roof I understood how strong and immutable must be the purpose which had kept him in that inhospitable abode.
Was he our malignant enemy, or was he by chance our guardian angel? I swore that I would not leave the hut until I knew.
Outside the sun was sinking low and the west was blazing with scarlet and gold. Its reflection was shot back in ruddy patches by the distant pools which lay amid the great Grimpen Mire.
There were the two towers of Baskerville Hall, and there a distant blur of smoke which marked the village of Grimpen.
With tingling nerves, but a fixed purpose, I sat in the dark recess of the hut and waited with sombre patience for the coming of its tenant.
And then at last I heard him. Far away came the sharp clink of a boot striking upon a stone. Then another and yet another, coming nearer and nearer.
I shrank back into the darkest corner, and cocked the pistol in my pocket, determined not to discover myself until I had an opportunity of seeing something of the stranger.
There was a long pause which showed that he had stopped. Then once more the footsteps approached and a shadow fell across the opening of the hut.
"It is a lovely evening, my dear Watson," said a well-known voice. "I really think that you will be more comfortable outside than in."
I stooped under the rude lintel, and there he sat upon a stone outside, his gray eyes dancing with amusement as they fell upon my astonished features.
He was thin and worn, but clear and alert, his keen face bronzed by the sun and roughened by the wind.
In his tweed suit and cloth cap he looked like any other tourist upon the moor, and he had contrived, with that cat-like love of personal cleanliness which was one of his characteristics, that his chin should be as smooth and his linen as perfect as if he were in Baker Street.
The surprise was not all on one side, I assure you. I had no idea that you had found my occasional retreat, still less that you were inside it, until I was within twenty paces of the door.
No, Watson; I fear that I could not undertake to recognize your footprint amid all the footprints of the world.
If you seriously desire to deceive me you must change your tobacconist; for when I see the stub of a cigarette marked Bradley, Oxford Street, I know that my friend Watson is in the neighbourhood.
You will see it there beside the path. You threw it down, no doubt, at that supreme moment when you charged into the empty hut.
I thought as much--and knowing your admirable tenacity I was convinced that you were sitting in ambush, a weapon within reach, waiting for the tenant to return.
Excellent, Watson! And how did you localize me? You saw me, perhaps, on the night of the convict hunt, when I was so imprudent as to allow the moon to rise behind me?
The old gentleman with the telescope, no doubt. I could not make it out when first I saw the light flashing upon the lens.
He rose and peeped into the hut. "Ha, I see that Cartwright has brought up some supplies. What's this paper?
Well done! Our researches have evidently been running on parallel lines, and when we unite our results I expect we shall have a fairly full knowledge of the case.
Well, I am glad from my heart that you are here, for indeed the responsibility and the mystery were both becoming too much for my nerves.
But how in the name of wonder did you come here, and what have you been doing? I thought that you were in Baker Street working out that case of blackmailing.
"Then you use me, and yet do not trust me!" I cried with some bitterness. "I think that I have deserved better at your hands, Holmes."
My dear fellow, you have been invaluable to me in this as in many other cases, and I beg that you will forgive me if I have seemed to play a trick upon you.
In truth, it was partly for your own sake that I did it, and it was my appreciation of the danger which you ran which led me to come down and examine the matter for myself.
Had I been with Sir Henry and you it is confident that my point of view would have been the same as yours, and my presence would have warned our very formidable opponents to be on their guard.
As it is, I have been able to get about as I could not possibly have done had I been living in the Hall, and I remain an unknown factor in the business, ready to throw in all my weight at a critical moment.
I brought Cartwright down with me--you remember the little chap at the express office--and he has seen after my simple wants: a loaf of bread and a clean collar.
What does man want more? He has given me an extra pair of eyes upon a very active pair of feet, and both have been invaluable.
"Then my reports have all been wasted!" --My voice trembled as I recalled the pains and the pride with which I had composed them.
Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and very well thumbed, I assure you. I made excellent arrangements, and they are only delayed one day upon their way.
I must compliment you exceedingly upon the zeal and the intelligence which you have shown over an extraordinarily difficult case.
I was still rather raw over the deception which had been practised upon me, but the warmth of Holmes's praise drove my anger from my mind.
I felt also in my heart that he was right in what he said and that it was really best for our purpose that I should not have known that he was upon the moor.
The sun had set and dusk was settling over the moor. The air had turned chill and we withdrew into the hut for warmth.
There, sitting together in the twilight, I told Holmes of my conversation with the lady. So interested was he that I had to repeat some of it twice before he was satisfied.
"This is most important," said he when I had concluded. "It fills up a gap which I had been unable to bridge, in this most complex affair.
There can be no doubt about the matter. They meet, they write, there is a complete understanding between them.
I am giving you some information now, in return for all that you have given me. The lady who has passed here as Miss Stapleton is in reality his wife.
Good heavens, Holmes! Are you sure of what you say? How could he have permitted Sir Henry to fall in love with her?
Sir Henry's falling in love could do no harm to anyone except Sir Henry. He took particular care that Sir Henry did not make love to her, as you have yourself observed.
All my unspoken instincts, my vague suspicions, suddenly took shape and centred upon the naturalist. In that impassive, colourless man, with his straw hat and his butterfly-net, I seemed to see something terrible--a creature of infinite patience and craft, with a smiling face and a murderous heart.
The shape of some monstrous villainy, half seen, half guessed, loomed through the darkness which had girt me so long.
Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a true piece of autobiography upon the occasion when he first met you, and I dare say he has many a time regretted it since.
He was once a schoolmaster in the north of England. Now, there is no one more easy to trace than a schoolmaster.
The descriptions agreed. When I learned that the missing man was devoted to entomology the identification was complete.
That is one of the points upon which your own researches have shed a light. Your interview with the lady has cleared the situation very much.
I did not know about a projected divorce between herself and her husband. In that case, regarding Stapleton as an unmarried man, she counted no doubt upon becoming his wife.
Why, then we may find the lady of service. It must be our first duty to see her--both of us--to-morrow.
Don't you think, Watson, that you are away from your charge rather long? Your place should be at Baskerville Hall.
The last red streaks had faded away in the west and night had settled upon the moor. A few faint stars were gleaming in a violet sky.
"One last question, Holmes," I said, as I rose. "Surely there is no need of secrecy between you and me.
There is but one danger which can threaten us. It is that he should strike before we are ready to do so.
Another day--two at the most--and I have my case complete, but until then guard your charge as closely as ever a fond mother watched her ailing child.
Your mission to-day has justified itself, and yet I could almost wish that you had not left his side.
A terrible scream--a prolonged yell of horror and anguish--burst out of the silence of the moor. That frightful cry turned the blood to ice in my veins.
Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark, athletic outline at the door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head thrust forward, his face peering into the darkness.
The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence, but it had pealed out from somewhere far off on the shadowy plain.
"Where is it?" Holmes whispered; and I knew from the thrill of his voice that he, the man of iron, was shaken to the soul.
Again the agonized cry swept through the silent night, louder and much nearer than ever. And a new sound mingled with it, a deep, muttered rumble, musical and yet menacing, rising and falling like the low, constant murmur of the sea.
I saw Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man distracted. He stamped his feet upon the ground.
Fool that I was to hold my hand. And you, Watson, see what comes of abandoning your charge! But, by Heaven, if the worst has happened, we'll avenge him!
At every rise Holmes looked eagerly round him, but the shadows were thick upon the moor, and nothing moved upon its dreary face.
A low moan had fallen upon our ears. There it was again upon our left! On that side a ridge of rocks ended in a sheer cliff which overlooked a stone-strewn slope.
On its jagged face was spread-eagled some dark, irregular object. As we ran towards it the vague outline hardened into a definite shape.
It was a prostrate man face downward upon the ground, the head doubled under him at a horrible angle, the shoulders rounded and the body hunched together as if in the act of throwing a somersault.
So grotesque was the attitude that I could not for the instant realize that that moan had been the passing of his soul.
Not a whisper, not a rustle, rose now from the dark figure over which we stooped. Holmes laid his hand upon him, and held it up again, with an exclamation of horror.
The gleam of the match which he struck shone upon his clotted fingers and upon the ghastly pool which widened slowly from the crushed skull of the victim.
And it shone upon something else which turned our hearts sick and faint within us--the body of Sir Henry Baskerville!
There was no chance of either of us forgetting that peculiar ruddy tweed suit--the very one which he had worn on the first morning that we had seen him in Baker Street.
We caught the one clear glimpse of it, and then the match flickered and went out, even as the hope had gone out of our souls.
"The brute! the brute!" I cried with clenched hands. "Oh Holmes, I shall never forgive myself for having left him to his fate."
I am more to blame than you, Watson. In order to have my case well rounded and complete, I have thrown away the life of my client.
It is the greatest blow which has befallen me in my career. But how could I know--how could l know--that he would risk his life alone upon the moor in the face of all my warnings?
That we should have heard his screams--my God, those screams!--and yet have been unable to save him! Where is this brute of a hound which drove him to his death?
It may be lurking among these rocks at this instant. And Stapleton, where is he? He shall answer for this deed.
But now we have to prove the connection between the man and the beast. Save from what we heard, we cannot even swear to the existence of the latter, since Sir Henry has evidently died from the fall.
We stood with bitter hearts on either side of the mangled body, overwhelmed by this sudden and irrevocable disaster which had brought all our long and weary labours to so piteous an end.
Then, as the moon rose we climbed to the top of the rocks over which our poor friend had fallen, and from the summit we gazed out over the shadowy moor, half silver and half gloom.
Far away, miles off, in the direction of Grimpen, a single steady yellow light was shining. It could only come from the lonely abode of the Stapletons.
Our case is not complete. The fellow is wary and cunning to the last degree. It is not what we know, but what we can prove.
There will be plenty for us to do to-morrow. To-night we can only perform the last offices to our poor friend.
Together we made our way down the precipitous slope and approached the body, black and clear against the silvered stones.
We must send for help, Holmes! We cannot carry him all the way to the Hall. Good heavens, are you mad?
He had uttered a cry and bent over the body. Now he was dancing and laughing and wringing my hand. Could this be my stern, self-contained friend?
With feverish haste we had turned the body over, and that dripping beard was pointing up to the cold, clear moon.
There could be no doubt about the beetling forehead, the sunken animal eyes. It was indeed the same face which had glared upon me in the light of the candle from over the rock--the face of Selden, the criminal.
Then in an instant it was all clear to me. I remembered how the baronet had told me that he had handed his old wardrobe to Barrymore.
Barrymore had passed it on in order to help Selden in his escape. Boots, shirt, cap--it was all Sir Henry's.
The tragedy was still black enough, but this man had at least deserved death by the laws of his country.
There is one very singular thing, however: How came Selden, in the darkness, to know that the hound was on his trail?
To hear a hound upon the moor would not work a hard man like this convict into such a paroxysm of terror that he would risk recapture by screaming wildly for help.
Well, then, why this hound should be loose to-night. I suppose that it does not always run loose upon the moor.
My difficulty is the more formidable of the two, for I think that we shall very shortly get an explanation of yours, while mine may remain forever a mystery.
The question now is, what shall we do with this poor wretch's body? We cannot leave it here to the foxes and the ravens.
Exactly. I have no doubt that you and I could carry it so far. Halloa, Watson, what's this? It's the man himself, by all that's wonderful and audacious!
A figure was approaching us over the moor, and I saw the dull red glow of a cigar. The moon shone upon him, and I could distinguish the dapper shape and jaunty walk of the naturalist.
Why, Dr. Watson, that's not you, is it? You are the last man that I should have expected to see out on the moor at this time of night.
But, dear me, what's this? Somebody hurt? Not--don't tell me that it is our friend Sir Henry!" He hurried past me and stooped over the dead man.
Stapleton turned a ghastly face upon us, but by a supreme effort he had overcome his amazement and his disappointment.
He appears to have broken his neck by falling over these rocks. My friend and I were strolling on the moor when we heard a cry.
Because I had suggested that he should come over. When he did not come I was surprised, and I naturally became alarmed for his safety when I heard cries upon the moor.
By the way"--his eyes darted again from my face to Holmes's--"did you hear anything else besides a cry?"
Oh, you know the stories that the peasants tell about a phantom hound, and so on. It is said to be heard at night upon the moor.
I have no doubt that anxiety and exposure have driven him off his head. He has rushed about the moor in a crazy state and eventually fallen over here and broken his neck.
"That seems the most reasonable theory," said Stapleton, and he gave a sigh which I took to indicate his relief.
We have been expecting you in these parts since Dr. Watson came down. You are in time to see a tragedy.
Yes, indeed. I have no doubt that my friend's explanation will cover the facts. I will take an unpleasant remembrance back to London with me to-morrow.
One cannot always have the success for which one hopes. An investigator needs facts, and not legends or rumours.
My friend spoke in his frankest and most unconcerned manner. Stapleton still looked hard at him. Then he turned to me.
I would suggest carrying this poor fellow to my house, but it would give my sister such a fright that I do not feel justified in doing it.
And so it was arranged. Resisting Stapleton's offer of hospitality, Holmes and I set off to Baskerville Hall, leaving the naturalist to return alone.
Looking back we saw the figure moving slowly away over the broad moor, and behind him that one black smudge on the silvered slope which showed where the man was lying who had come so horribly to his end.
"We're at close grips at last," said Holmes as we walked together across the moor. "What a nerve the fellow has!
How he pulled himself together in the face of what must have been a paralyzing shock when he found that the wrong man had fallen a victim to his plot.
I told you in London, Watson, and I tell you now again, that we have never had a foeman more worthy of our steel.
It may cause him to be more cautious, or it may drive him to desperate measures at once. Like most clever criminals, he may be too confident in his own cleverness and imagine that he has completely deceived us.
My dear Watson, you were born to be a man of action. Your instinct is always to do something energetic.
But supposing, for argument's sake, that we had him arrested to-night, what on earth the better off should we be for that?
We could prove nothing against him. There's the devilish cunning of it! If he were acting through a human agent we could get some evidence, but if we were to drag this great dog to the light of day it would not help us in putting a rope round the neck of its master.
Not a shadow of one--only surmise and conjecture. We should be laughed out of court if we came with such a story and such evidence.
Found dead without a mark upon him. You and I know that he died of sheer fright, and we know also what frightened him; but how are we to get twelve stolid jurymen to know it?
What signs are there of a hound? Where are the marks of its fangs? Of course we know that a hound does not bite a dead body and that Sir Charles was dead before ever the brute overtook him.
We are not much better off to-night. Again, there was no direct connection between the hound and the man's death.
We never saw the hound. We heard it; but we could not prove that it was running upon this man's trail.
There is a complete absence of motive. No, my dear fellow; we must reconcile ourselves to the fact that we have no case at present, and that it is worth our while to run any risk in order to establish one.
I have great hopes of what Mrs. Laura Lyons may do for us when the position of affairs is made clear to her.
And I have my own plan as well. Sufficient for to-morrow is the evil thereof; but I hope before the day is past to have the upper hand at last.
I could draw nothing further from him, and he walked, lost in thought, as far as the Baskerville gates.
Yes; I see no reason for further concealment. But one last word, Watson. Say nothing of the hound to Sir Henry.
Let him think that Selden's death was as Stapleton would have us believe. He will have a better nerve for the ordeal which he will have to undergo to-morrow, when he is engaged, if I remember your report aright, to dine with these people.
Then you must excuse yourself and he must go alone. That will be easily arranged. And now, if we are too late for dinner, I think that we are both ready for our suppers.
Sir Henry was more pleased than surprised to see Sherlock Holmes, for he had for some days been expecting that recent events would bring him down from London.
He did raise his eyebrows, however, when he found that my friend had neither any luggage nor any explanations for its absence.
Between us we soon supplied his wants, and then over a belated supper we explained to the baronet as much of our experience as it seemed desirable that he should know.
But first I had the unpleasant duty of breaking the news to Barrymore and his wife. To him it may have been an unmitigated relief, but she wept bitterly in her apron.
To all the world he was the man of violence, half animal and half demon; but to her he always remained the little wilful boy of her own girlhood, the child who had clung to her hand.
"I've been moping in the house all day since Watson went off in the morning," said the baronet. "I guess I should have some credit, for I have kept my promise.
If I hadn't sworn not to go about alone I might have had a more lively evening, for I had a message from Stapleton asking me over there.
"I have no doubt that you would have had a more lively evening," said Holmes drily. "By the way, I don't suppose you appreciate that we have been mourning over you as having broken your neck?"
This poor wretch was dressed in your clothes. I fear your servant who gave them to him may get into trouble with the police.
That's lucky for him--in fact, it's lucky for all of you, since you are all on the wrong side of the law in this matter.
I am not sure that as a conscientious detective my first duty is not to arrest the whole household. Watson's reports are most incriminating documents.
"But how about the case?" asked the baronet. "Have you made anything out of the tangle? I don't know that Watson and I are much the wiser since we came down."
I think that I shall be in a position to make the situation rather more clear to you before long. It has been an exceedingly difficult and most complicated business.
We've had one experience, as Watson has no doubt told you. We heard the hound on the moor, so I can swear that it is not all empty superstition.
I had something to do with dogs when I was out West, and I know one when I hear one. If you can muzzle that one and put him on a chain I'll be ready to swear you are the greatest detective of all time.
If you will do this I think the chances are that our little problem will soon be solved. I have no doubt----
He stopped suddenly and stared fixedly up over my head into the air. The lamp beat upon his face, and so intent was it and so still that it might have been that of a clear-cut classical statue, a personification of alertness and expectation.
I could see as he looked down that he was repressing some internal emotion. His features were still composed, but his eyes shone with amused exultation.
"Excuse the admiration of a connoisseur," said he as he waved his hand towards the line of portraits which covered the opposite wall.
Watson won't allow that I know anything of art, but that is mere jealousy, because our views upon the subject differ.
I know what is good when I see it, and I see it now. That's a Kneller, I'll swear, that lady in the blue silk over yonder, and the stout gentleman with the wig ought to be a Reynolds.
That is Rear-Admiral Baskerville, who served under Rodney in the West Indies. The man with the blue coat and the roll of paper is Sir William Baskerville, who was Chairman of Committees of the House of Commons under Pitt.
Ah, you have a right to know about him. That is the cause of all the mischief, the wicked Hugo, who started the Hound of the Baskervilles.
"Dear me!" said Holmes, "he seems a quiet, meek-mannered man enough, but I dare say that there was a lurking devil in his eyes.
There's no doubt about the authenticity, for the name and the date, 1647, are on the back of the canvas.
Holmes said little more, but the picture of the old roysterer seemed to have a fascination for him, and his eyes were continually fixed upon it during supper.
It was not until later, when Sir Henry had gone to his room, that I was able to follow the trend of his thoughts.
He led me back into the banqueting-hall, his bedroom candle in his hand, and he held it up against the time-stained portrait on the wall.
I looked at the broad plumed hat, the curling love-locks, the white lace collar, and the straight, severe face which was framed between them.
It was not a brutal countenance, but it was prim, hard, and stern, with a firm-set, thin-lipped mouth, and a coldly intolerant eye.
"Just a suggestion, perhaps. But wait an instant!" He stood upon a chair, and, holding up the light in his left hand, he curved his right arm over the broad hat and round the long ringlets.
Ha, you see it now. My eyes have been trained to examine faces and not their trimmings. It is the first quality of a criminal investigator that he should see through a disguise.
Yes, it is an interesting instance of a throwback, which appears to be both physical and spiritual. A study of family portraits is enough to convert a man to the doctrine of reincarnation.
A pin, a cork, and a card, and we add him to the Baker Street collection!" He burst into one of his rare fits of laughter as he turned away from the picture.
I was up betimes in the morning, but Holmes was afoot earlier still, for I saw him as I dressed, coming up the drive.
"Yes, we should have a full day to-day," he remarked, and he rubbed his hands with the joy of action.
The nets are all in place, and the drag is about to begin. We'll know before the day is out whether we have caught our big, lean-jawed pike, or whether he has got through the meshes.
I have sent a report from Grimpen to Princetown as to the death of Selden. I think I can promise that none of you will be troubled in the matter.
And I have also communicated with my faithful Cartwright, who would certainly have pined away at the door of my hut, as a dog does at his master's grave, if I had not set his mind at rest about my safety.
"Good morning, Holmes," said the baronet. "You look like a general who is planning a battle with his chief of the staff."
I hope that you will come also. They are very hospitable people, and I am sure that they would be very glad to see you.
I hoped that you were going to see me through this business. The Hall and the moor are not very pleasant places when one is alone.
Immediately after breakfast. We will drive in to Coombe Tracey, but Watson will leave his things as a pledge that he will come back to you.
Because it is your post of duty. Because you gave me your word that you would do as you were told, and I tell you to stay.
One more direction! I wish you to drive to Merripit House. Send back your trap, however, and let them know that you intend to walk home.
This time you may do it with safety. If I had not every confidence in your nerve and courage I would not suggest it, but it is essential that you should do it.
And as you value your life do not go across the moor in any direction save along the straight path which leads from Merripit House to the Grimpen Road, and is your natural way home.
Very good. I should be glad to get away as soon after breakfast as possible, so as to reach London in the afternoon.
I was much astounded by this programme, though I remembered that Holmes had said to Stapleton on the night before that his visit would terminate next day.
It had not crossed my mind, however, that he would wish me to go with him, nor could I understand how we could both be absent at a moment which he himself declared to be critical.
You will take this train to town, Cartwright. The moment you arrive you will send a wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, in my name, to say that if he finds the pocket-book which I have dropped he is to send it by registered post to Baker Street.
The boy returned with a telegram, which Holmes handed to me. It ran: "Wire received. Coming down with unsigned warrant.
That is in answer to mine of this morning. He is the best of the professionals, I think, and we may need his assistance.
Now, Watson, I think that we cannot employ our time better than by calling upon your acquaintance, Mrs. Laura Lyons.
That telegram from London, if mentioned by Sir Henry to the Stapletons, must remove the last suspicions from their minds.
Mrs. Laura Lyons was in her office, and Sherlock Holmes opened his interview with a frankness and directness which considerably amazed her.
"I am investigating the circumstances which attended the death of the late Sir Charles Baskerville," said he.
My friend here, Dr. Watson, has informed me of what you have communicated, and also of what you have withheld in connection with that matter.
You have confessed that you asked Sir Charles to be at the gate at ten o'clock. We know that that was the place and hour of his death.
In that case the coincidence must indeed be an extraordinary one. But I think that we shall succeed in establishing a connection after all.
I wish to be perfectly frank with you, Mrs. Lyons. We regard this case as one of murder, and the evidence may implicate not only your friend Mr. Stapleton, but his wife as well.
Mrs. Lyons had resumed her seat. Her hands were grasping the arms of her chair, and I saw that the pink nails had turned white with the pressure of her grip.
"I have come prepared to do so," said Holmes, drawing several papers from his pocket. "Here is a photograph of the couple taken in York four years ago.
It is indorsed 'Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,' but you will have no difficulty in recognizing him, and her also, if you know her by sight.
Here are three written descriptions by trustworthy witnesses of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur, who at that time kept St. Oliver's private school.
"Mr. Holmes," she said, "this man had offered me marriage on condition that I could get a divorce from my husband.
He has lied to me, the villain, in every conceivable way. Not one word of truth has he ever told me. And why--why?
I imagined that all was for my own sake. But now I see that I was never anything but a tool in his hands.
Why should I preserve faith with him who never kept any with me? Why should I try to shield him from the consequences of his own wicked acts?
Ask me what you like, and there is nothing which I shall hold back. One thing I swear to you, and that is that when I wrote the letter I never dreamed of any harm to the old gentleman, who had been my kindest friend.
I presume that the reason he gave was that you would receive help from Sir Charles for the legal expenses connected with your divorce?
He told me that it would hurt his self-respect that any other man should find the money for such an object, and that though he was a poor man himself he would devote his last penny to removing the obstacles which divided us.
He appears to be a very consistent character. And then you heard nothing until you read the reports of the death in the paper?
He did. He said that the death was a very mysterious one, and that I should certainly be suspected if the facts came out.
"I think that on the whole you have had a fortunate escape," said Sherlock Holmes. "You have had him in your power and he knew it, and yet you are alive.
You have been walking for some months very near to the edge of a precipice. We must wish you good-morning now, Mrs. Lyons, and it is probable that you will very shortly hear from us again.
"Our case becomes rounded off, and difficulty after difficulty thins away in front of us," said Holmes as we stood waiting for the arrival of the express from town.
I shall soon be in the position of being able to put into a single connected narrative one of the most singular and sensational crimes of modern times.
Even now we have no clear case against this very wily man. But I shall be very much surprised if it is not clear enough before we go to bed this night.
The London express came roaring into the station, and a small, wiry bulldog of a man had sprung from a first-class carriage.
We all three shook hands, and I saw at once from the reverential way in which Lestrade gazed at my companion that he had learned a good deal since the days when they had first worked together.
I could well remember the scorn which the theories of the reasoner used then to excite in the practical man.
One of Sherlock Holmes's defects--if, indeed, one may call it a defect--was that he was exceedingly loath to communicate his full plans to any other person until the instant of their fulfilment.
Partly it came no doubt from his own masterful nature, which loved to dominate and surprise those who were around him.
Partly also from his professional caution, which urged him never to take any chances. The result, however, was very trying for those who were acting as his agents and assistants.
My nerves thrilled with anticipation when at last the cold wind upon our faces and the dark, void spaces on either side of the narrow road told me that we were back upon the moor once again.
Every stride of the horses and every turn of the wheels was taking us nearer to our supreme adventure.
Our conversation was hampered by the presence of the driver of the hired wagonette, so that we were forced to talk of trivial matters when our nerves were tense with emotion and anticipation.
It was a relief to me, after that unnatural restraint, when we at last passed Frankland's house and knew that we were drawing near to the Hall and to the scene of action.
We did not drive up to the door but got down near the gate of the avenue. The wagonette was paid off and ordered to return to Coombe Tracey forthwith, while we started to walk to Merripit House.
As long as I have my trousers I have a hip-pocket, and as long as I have my hip-pocket I have something in it.
"My word, it does not seem a very cheerful place," said the detective with a shiver, glancing round him at the gloomy slopes of the hill and at the huge lake of fog which lay over the Grimpen Mire.
That is Merripit House and the end of our journey. I must request you to walk on tiptoe and not to talk above a whisper.
We moved cautiously along the track as if we were bound for the house, but Holmes halted us when we were about two hundred yards from it.
Yes, we shall make our little ambush here. Get into this hollow, Lestrade. You have been inside the house, have you not, Watson?
The blinds are up. You know the lie of the land best. Creep forward quietly and see what they are doing--but for heaven's sake don't let them know that they are watched!
I tiptoed down the path and stooped behind the low wall which surrounded the stunted orchard. Creeping in its shadow I reached a point whence I could look straight through the uncurtained window.
There were only two men in the room, Sir Henry and Stapleton. They sat with their profiles towards me on either side of the round table.
Both of them were smoking cigars, and coffee and wine were in front of them. Stapleton was talking with animation, but the baronet looked pale and distrait.
Perhaps the thought of that lonely walk across the ill-omened moor was weighing heavily upon his mind.
As I watched them Stapleton rose and left the room, while Sir Henry filled his glass again and leaned back in his chair, puffing at his cigar.
I heard the creak of a door and the crisp sound of boots upon gravel. The steps passed along the path on the other side of the wall under which I crouched.
Looking over, I saw the naturalist pause at the door of an out-house in the corner of the orchard. A key turned in a lock, and as he passed in there was a curious scuffling noise from within.
He was only a minute or so inside, and then I heard the key turn once more and he passed me and re-entered the house.
I saw him rejoin his guest, and I crept quietly back to where my companions were waiting to tell them what I had seen.
The moon shone on it, and it looked like a great shimmering ice-field, with the heads of the distant tors as rocks borne upon its surface.
Very serious, indeed--the one thing upon earth which could have disarranged my plans. He can't be very long, now.
It is already ten o'clock. Our success and even his life may depend upon his coming out before the fog is over the path.
The night was clear and fine above us. The stars shone cold and bright, while a half-moon bathed the whole scene in a soft, uncertain light.
Before us lay the dark bulk of the house, its serrated roof and bristling chimneys hard outlined against the silver-spangled sky.
Broad bars of golden light from the lower windows stretched across the orchard and the moor. One of them was suddenly shut off.
The servants had left the kitchen. There only remained the lamp in the dining-room where the two men, the murderous host and the unconscious guest, still chatted over their cigars.
Every minute that white woolly plain which covered one half of the moor was drifting closer and closer to the house.
Holmes struck his hand passionately upon the rock in front of us and stamped his feet in his impatience.
If he isn't out in a quarter of an hour the path will be covered. In half an hour we won't be able to see our hands in front of us.
So as the fog-bank flowed onward we fell back before it until we were half a mile from the house, and still that dense white sea, with the moon silvering its upper edge, swept slowly and inexorably on.
"We are going too far," said Holmes. "We dare not take the chance of his being overtaken before he can reach us.
At all costs we must hold our ground where we are." He dropped on his knees and clapped his ear to the ground.
A sound of quick steps broke the silence of the moor. Crouching among the stones we stared intently at the silver-tipped bank in front of us.
The steps grew louder, and through the fog, as through a curtain, there stepped the man whom we were awaiting.
He looked round him in surprise as he emerged into the clear, starlit night. Then he came swiftly along the path, passed close to where we lay, and went on up the long slope behind us.
I was at Holmes's elbow, and I glanced for an instant at his face. It was pale and exultant, his eyes shining brightly in the moonlight.
But suddenly they started forward in a rigid, fixed stare, and his lips parted in amazement. At the same instant Lestrade gave a yell of terror and threw himself face downward upon the ground.
I sprang to my feet, my inert hand grasping my pistol, my mind paralyzed by the dreadful shape which had sprung out upon us from the shadows of the fog.
Never in the delirious dream of a disordered brain could anything more savage, more appalling, more hellish be conceived than that dark form and savage face which broke upon us out of the wall of fog.
With long bounds the huge black creature was leaping down the track, following hard upon the footsteps of our friend.
So paralyzed were we by the apparition that we allowed him to pass before we had recovered our nerve.
Then Holmes and I both fired together, and the creature gave a hideous howl, which showed that one at least had hit him.
He did not pause, however, but bounded onward. Far away on the path we saw Sir Henry looking back, his face white in the moonlight, his hands raised in horror, glaring helplessly at the frightful thing which was hunting him down.
But that cry of pain from the hound had blown all our fears to the winds. If he was vulnerable he was mortal, and if we could wound him we could kill him.
Never have I seen a man run as Holmes ran that night. I am reckoned fleet of foot, but he outpaced me as much as I outpaced the little professional.
In front of us as we flew up the track we heard scream after scream from Sir Henry and the deep roar of the hound.
I was in time to see the beast spring upon its victim, hurl him to the ground, and worry at his throat.
I stooped, panting, and pressed my pistol to the dreadful, shimmering head, but it was useless to press the trigger.
Sir Henry lay insensible where he had fallen. We tore away his collar, and Holmes breathed a prayer of gratitude when we saw that there was no sign of a wound and that the rescue had been in time.
Already our friend's eyelids shivered and he made a feeble effort to move. Lestrade thrust his brandy-flask between the baronet's teeth, and two frightened eyes were looking up at us.
Even now, in the stillness of death, the huge jaws seemed to be dripping with a bluish flame and the small, deep-set, cruel eyes were ringed with fire.
I placed my hand upon the glowing muzzle, and as I held them up my own fingers smouldered and gleamed in the darkness.
"A cunning preparation of it," said Holmes, sniffing at the dead animal. "There is no smell which might have interfered with his power of scent.
We owe you a deep apology, Sir Henry, for having exposed you to this fright. I was prepared for a hound, but not for such a creature as this.
Give me another mouthful of that brandy and I shall be ready for anything. So! Now, if you will help me up.
To leave you here. You are not fit for further adventures to-night. If you will wait, one or other of us will go back with you to the Hall.
He tried to stagger to his feet; but he was still ghastly pale and trembling in every limb. We helped him to a rock, where he sat shivering with his face buried in his hands.
"It's a thousand to one against our finding him at the house," he continued as we retraced our steps swiftly down the path.
He followed the hound to call him off--of that you may be certain. No, no, he's gone by this time! But we'll search the house and make sure.
The front door was open, so we rushed in and hurried from room to room to the amazement of a doddering old manservant, who met us in the passage.
There was no light save in the dining-room, but Holmes caught up the lamp and left no corner of the house unexplored.
No sign could we see of the man whom we were chasing. On the upper floor, however, one of the bedroom doors was locked.
A faint moaning and rustling came from within. Holmes struck the door just over the lock with the flat of his foot and it flew open.
But there was no sign within it of that desperate and defiant villain whom we expected to see. Instead we were faced by an object so strange and so unexpected that we stood for a moment staring at it in amazement.
In the centre of this room there was an upright beam, which had been placed at some period as a support for the old worm-eaten baulk of timber which spanned the roof.
To this post a figure was tied, so swathed and muffled in the sheets which had been used to secure it that one could not for the moment tell whether it was that of a man or a woman.
In a minute we had torn off the gag, unswathed the bonds, and Mrs. Stapleton sank upon the floor in front of us.
"The brute!" cried Holmes. "Here, Lestrade, your brandy-bottle! Put her in the chair! She has fainted from ill-usage and exhaustion."
"Thank God! Thank God! Oh, this villain! See how he has treated me!" She shot her arms out from her sleeves, and we saw with horror that they were all mottled with bruises.
"You bear him no good will, madam," said Holmes. "Tell us then where we shall find him. If you have ever aided him in evil, help us now and so atone."
"There is but one place where he can have fled," she answered. "There is an old tin mine on an island in the heart of the mire.
It was there that he kept his hound and there also he had made preparations so that he might have a refuge.
"He may find his way in, but never out," she cried. "How can he see the guiding wands to-night? We planted them together, he and I, to mark the pathway through the mire.
It was evident to us that all pursuit was in vain until the fog had lifted. Meanwhile we left Lestrade in possession of the house while Holmes and I went back with the baronet to Baskerville Hall.
The story of the Stapletons could no longer be withheld from him, but he took the blow bravely when he learned the truth about the woman whom he had loved.
But the shock of the night's adventures had shattered his nerves, and before morning he lay delirious in a high fever, under the care of Dr. Mortimer.
The two of them were destined to travel together round the world before Sir Henry had become once more the hale, hearty man that he had been before he became master of that ill-omened estate.
On the morning after the death of the hound the fog had lifted and we were guided by Mrs. Stapleton to the point where they had found a pathway through the bog.
It helped us to realize the horror of this woman's life when we saw the eagerness and joy with which she laid us on her husband's track.
We left her standing upon the thin peninsula of firm, peaty soil which tapered out into the widespread bog.
Once only we saw a trace that someone had passed that perilous way before us. From amid a tuft of cotton grass which bore it up out of the slime some dark thing was projecting.
Holmes sank to his waist as he stepped from the path to seize it, and had we not been there to drag him out he could never have set his foot upon firm land again.
Exactly. He retained it in his hand after using it to set the hound upon the track. He fled when he knew the game was up, still clutching it.
But no slightest sign of them ever met our eyes. If the earth told a true story, then Stapleton never reached that island of refuge towards which he struggled through the fog upon that last night.
Somewhere in the heart of the great Grimpen Mire, down in the foul slime of the huge morass which had sucked him in, this cold and cruel-hearted man is forever buried.
Many traces we found of him in the bog-girt island where he had hid his savage ally. A huge driving-wheel and a shaft half-filled with rubbish showed the position of an abandoned mine.
Beside it were the crumbling remains of the cottages of the miners, driven away no doubt by the foul reek of the surrounding swamp.
In one of these a staple and chain with a quantity of gnawed bones showed where the animal had been confined.
"A dog!" said Holmes. "By Jove, a curly-haired spaniel. Poor Mortimer will never see his pet again. Well, I do not know that this place contains any secret which we have not already fathomed.
He could hide his hound, but he could not hush its voice, and hence came those cries which even in daylight were not pleasant to hear.
I said it in London, Watson, and I say it again now, that never yet have we helped to hunt down a more dangerous man than he who is lying yonder"--he swept his long arm towards the huge mottled expanse of green-splotched bog which stretched away until it merged into the russet slopes of the moor.
It was the end of November and Holmes and I sat, upon a raw and foggy night, on either side of a blazing fire in our sitting-room in Baker Street.
Montpensier from the charge of murder which hung over her in connection with the death of her step-daughter, Mlle.
Sir Henry and Dr. Mortimer were, however, in London, on their way to that long voyage which had been recommended for the restoration of his shattered nerves.
They had called upon us that very afternoon, so that it was natural that the subject should come up for discussion.
I have had the advantage of two conversations with Mrs. Stapleton, and the case has now been so entirely cleared up that I am not aware that there is anything which has remained a secret to us.
We had an example of his readiness of resource that morning when he got away from us so successfully, and also of his audacity in sending back my own name to me through the cabman.
From that moment he understood that I had taken over the case in London, and that therefore there was no chance for him there.
"One moment!" said I. "You have, no doubt, described the sequence of events correctly, but there is one point which you have left unexplained.
She was ready to warn Sir Henry so far as she could without implicating her husband, and again and again she tried to do so.
By encouraging the intimacy he made it certain that Sir Henry would frequently come to Merripit House and that he would sooner or later get the opportunity which he desired.
She taxed her husband with his intended crime, and a furious scene followed, in which he showed her for the first time that she had a rival in his love.
In this I fancy that in any case he made a miscalculation, and that, if we had not been there, his doom would none the less have been sealed.
A woman of Spanish blood does not condone such an injury so lightly. And now, my dear Watson, without referring to my notes, I cannot give you a more detailed account of this curious case.
The beast was savage and half-starved. If its appearance did not frighten its victim to death, at least it would paralyze the resistance which might be offered.
Mrs. Stapleton has heard her husband discuss the problem on several occasions. There were three possible courses.
I have a box for 'Les Huguenots.' Have you heard the De Reszkes? Might I trouble you then to be ready in half an hour, and we can stop at Marcini's for a little dinner on the way?
The Adventure of the Empty House. The Adventure of the Norwood Builder. The Adventure of the Dancing Men.
The Adventure of the Solitary Cyclist. The Adventure of the Priory School. The Adventure of Black Peter.
The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton. The Adventure of the Six Napoleons. The Adventure of the Three Students.
The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez. The Adventure of the Missing Three-Quarter. The Adventure of the Abbey Grange.
Only now, at the end of nearly ten years, am I allowed to supply those missing links which make up the whole of that remarkable chain.
Even now, after this long interval, I find myself thrilling as I think of it, and feeling once more that sudden flood of joy, amazement, and incredulity which utterly submerged my mind.
Let me say to that public which has shown some interest in those glimpses which I have occasionally given them of the thoughts and actions of a very remarkable man that they are not to blame me if I have not shared my knowledge with them, for I should have considered it my first duty to have done so had I not been barred by a positive prohibition from his own lips, which was only withdrawn upon the third of last month.
All day as I drove upon my round I turned over the case in my mind, and found no explanation which appeared to me to be adequate.
At the risk of telling a twice-told tale I will recapitulate the facts as they were known to the public at the conclusion of the inquest.
The Honourable Ronald Adair was the second son of the Earl of Maynooth, at that time Governor of one of the Australian Colonies.
Adair's mother had returned from Australia to undergo the operation for cataract, and she, her son Ronald, and her daughter Hilda were living together at 427, Park Lane.
For the rest the man's life moved in a narrow and conventional circle, for his habits were quiet and his nature unemotional.
Yet it was upon this easy-going young aristocrat that death came in most strange and unexpected form between the hours of ten and eleven-twenty on the night of March 30, 1894.
Ronald Adair was fond of cards, playing continually, but never for such stakes as would hurt him. He was a member of the Baldwin, the Cavendish, and the Bagatelle card clubs.
It was shown that after dinner on the day of his death he had played a rubber of whist at the latter club.
Adair might have lost five pounds, but not more. His fortune was a considerable one, and such a loss could not in any way affect him.
He had played nearly every day at one club or other, but he was a cautious player, and usually rose a winner.
It came out in evidence that in partnership with Colonel Moran he had actually won as much as four hundred and twenty pounds in a sitting some weeks before from Godfrey Milner and Lord Balmoral.
On the evening of the crime he returned from the club exactly at ten. His mother and sister were out spending the evening with a relation.
The servant deposed that she heard him enter the front room on the second floor, generally used as his sitting-room.
She had lit a fire there, and as it smoked she had opened the window. No sound was heard from the room until eleven-twenty, the hour of the return of Lady Maynooth and her daughter.
Desiring to say good-night, she had attempted to enter her son's room. The door was locked on the inside, and no answer could be got to their cries and knocking.
On the table lay two bank-notes for ten pounds each and seventeen pounds ten in silver and gold, the money arranged in little piles of varying amount.
There were some figures also upon a sheet of paper with the names of some club friends opposite to them, from which it was conjectured that before his death he was endeavouring to make out his losses or winnings at cards.
A minute examination of the circumstances served only to make the case more complex. In the first place, no reason could be given why the young man should have fastened the door upon the inside.
There was the possibility that the murderer had done this and had afterwards escaped by the window. The drop was at least twenty feet, however, and a bed of crocuses in full bloom lay beneath.
Neither the flowers nor the earth showed any sign of having been disturbed, nor were there any marks upon the narrow strip of grass which separated the house from the road.
Apparently, therefore, it was the young man himself who had fastened the door. But how did he come by his death?
Again, Park Lane is a frequented thoroughfare, and there is a cab-stand within a hundred yards of the house.
Such were the circumstances of the Park Lane Mystery, which were further complicated by entire absence of motive, since, as I have said, young Adair was not known to have any enemy, and no attempt had been made to remove the money or valuables in the room.
I confess that I made little progress. In the evening I strolled across the Park, and found myself about six o'clock at the Oxford Street end of Park Lane.
A group of loafers upon the pavements, all staring up at a particular window, directed me to the house which I had come to see.
I got as near him as I could, but his observations seemed to me to be absurd, so I withdrew again in some disgust.
As I did so I struck against an elderly deformed man, who had been behind me, and I knocked down several books which he was carrying.
I endeavoured to apologize for the accident, but it was evident that these books which I had so unfortunately maltreated were very precious objects in the eyes of their owner.
More puzzled than ever I retraced my steps to Kensington. I had not been in my study five minutes when the maid entered to say that a person desired to see me.
To my astonishment it was none other than my strange old book-collector, his sharp, wizened face peering out from a frame of white hair, and his precious volumes, a dozen of them at least, wedged under his right arm.
Well, I've a conscience, sir, and when I chanced to see you go into this house, as I came hobbling after you, I thought to myself, I'll just step in and see that kind gentleman, and tell him that if I was a bit gruff in my manner there was not any harm meant, and that I am much obliged to him for picking up my books.
Well, sir, if it isn't too great a liberty, I am a neighbour of yours, for you'll find my little bookshop at the corner of Church Street, and very happy to see you, I am sure.
Maybe you collect yourself, sir; here's 'British Birds,' and 'Catullus,' and 'The Holy War'--a bargain every one of them.
With five volumes you could just fill that gap on that second shelf. It looks untidy, does it not, sir?
I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me. When I turned again Sherlock Holmes was standing smiling at me across my study table.
I rose to my feet, stared at him for some seconds in utter amazement, and then it appears that I must have fainted for the first and the last time in my life.
Certainly a grey mist swirled before my eyes, and when it cleared I found my collar-ends undone and the tingling after-taste of brandy upon my lips.
"My dear Watson," said the well-remembered voice, "I owe you a thousand apologies. I had no idea that you would be so affected."
"Holmes!" I cried. "Is it really you? Can it indeed be that you are alive? Is it possible that you succeeded in climbing out of that awful abyss?"
"Wait a moment," said he. "Are you sure that you are really fit to discuss things? I have given you a serious shock by my unnecessarily dramatic reappearance."
I am all right, but indeed, Holmes, I can hardly believe my eyes. Good heavens, to think that you--you of all men--should be standing in my study!
Again I gripped him by the sleeve and felt the thin, sinewy arm beneath it. "Well, you're not a spirit, anyhow," said I.
My dear chap, I am overjoyed to see you. Sit down and tell me how you came alive out of that dreadful chasm.
Holmes looked even thinner and keener than of old, but there was a dead-white tinge in his aquiline face which told me that his life recently had not been a healthy one.
"I am glad to stretch myself, Watson," said he. "It is no joke when a tall man has to take a foot off his stature for several hours on end.
Now, my dear fellow, in the matter of these explanations we have, if I may ask for your co-operation, a hard and dangerous night's work in front of us.
Perhaps it would be better if I gave you an account of the whole situation when that work is finished.
This is indeed like the old days. We shall have time for a mouthful of dinner before we need go. Well, then, about that chasm.
I read an inexorable purpose in his grey eyes. I exchanged some remarks with him, therefore, and obtained his courteous permission to write the short note which you afterwards received.
I left it with my cigarette-box and my stick and I walked along the pathway, Moriarty still at my heels.
When I reached the end I stood at bay. He drew no weapon, but he rushed at me and threw his long arms around me.
He knew that his own game was up, and was only anxious to revenge himself upon me. We tottered together upon the brink of the fall.
I have some knowledge, however, of baritsu, or the Japanese system of wrestling, which has more than once been very useful to me.
I slipped through his grip, and he with a horrible scream kicked madly for a few seconds and clawed the air with both his hands.
But for all his efforts he could not get his balance, and over he went. With my face over the brink I saw him fall for a long way.
I listened with amazement to this explanation, which Holmes delivered between the puffs of his cigarette.
I travelled for two years in Tibet, therefore, and amused myself by visiting Lhassa and spending some days with the head Llama.
You may have read of the remarkable explorations of a Norwegian named Sigerson, but I am sure that it never occurred to you that you were receiving news of your friend.
I then passed through Persia, looked in at Mecca, and paid a short but interesting visit to the Khalifa at Khartoum, the results of which I have communicated to the Foreign Office.
Returning to France I spent some months in a research into the coal-tar derivatives, which I conducted in a laboratory at Montpelier, in the South of France.
So it was, my dear Watson, that at two o'clock to-day I found myself in my old arm-chair in my own old room, and only wishing that I could have seen my old friend Watson in the other chair which he has so often adorned.
In some manner he had learned of my own sad bereavement, and his sympathy was shown in his manner rather than in his words.
In vain I begged him to tell me more. "You will hear and see enough before morning," he answered. "We have three years of the past to discuss.
It was indeed like old times when, at that hour, I found myself seated beside him in a hansom, my revolver in my pocket and the thrill of adventure in my heart.
Holmes was cold and stern and silent. As the gleam of the street-lamps flashed upon his austere features I saw that his brows were drawn down in thought and his thin lips compressed.
I knew not what wild beast we were about to hunt down in the dark jungle of criminal London, but I was well assured from the bearing of this master huntsman that the adventure was a most grave one, while the sardonic smile which occasionally broke through his ascetic gloom boded little good for the object of our quest.
I had imagined that we were bound for Baker Street, but Holmes stopped the cab at the corner of Cavendish Square.
I observed that as he stepped out he gave a most searching glance to right and left, and at every subsequent street corner he took the utmost pains to assure that he was not followed.
We emerged at last into a small road, lined with old, gloomy houses, which led us into Manchester Street, and so to Blandford Street.
Here he turned swiftly down a narrow passage, passed through a wooden gate into a deserted yard, and then opened with a key the back door of a house.
Holmes's cold, thin fingers closed round my wrist and led me forwards down a long hall, until I dimly saw the murky fanlight over the door.
Here Holmes turned suddenly to the right, and we found ourselves in a large, square, empty room, heavily shadowed in the corners, but faintly lit in the centre from the lights of the street beyond.
There was no lamp near and the window was thick with dust, so that we could only just discern each other's figures within.
I crept forward and looked across at the familiar window. As my eyes fell upon it I gave a gasp and a cry of amazement.
The blind was down and a strong light was burning in the room. The shadow of a man who was seated in a chair within was thrown in hard, black outline upon the luminous screen of the window.
There was no mistaking the poise of the head, the squareness of the shoulders, the sharpness of the features.
The face was turned half-round, and the effect was that of one of those black silhouettes which our grandparents loved to frame.
It was a perfect reproduction of Holmes. So amazed was I that I threw out my hand to make sure that the man himself was standing beside me.
"I trust that age doth not wither nor custom stale my infinite variety,'" said he, and I recognised in his voice the joy and pride which the artist takes in his own creation.
The credit of the execution is due to Monsieur Oscar Meunier, of Grenoble, who spent some days in doing the moulding.
Because, my dear Watson, I had the strongest possible reason for wishing certain people to think that I was there when I was really elsewhere.
By my old enemies, Watson. By the charming society whose leader lies in the Reichenbach Fall. You must remember that they knew, and only they knew, that I was still alive.
Sooner or later they believed that I should come back to my rooms. They watched them continuously, and this morning they saw me arrive.
Because I recognised their sentinel when I glanced out of my window. He is a harmless enough fellow, Parker by name, a garroter by trade, and a remarkable performer upon the Jew's harp.
That is the man who is after me to-night, Watson, and that is the man who is quite unaware that we are after HIM.
My friend's plans were gradually revealing themselves. From this convenient retreat the watchers were being watched and the trackers tracked.
That angular shadow up yonder was the bait and we were the hunters. In silence we stood together in the darkness and watched the hurrying figures who passed and repassed in front of us.
Holmes was silent and motionless; but I could tell that he was keenly alert, and that his eyes were fixed intently upon the stream of passers-by.
It was a bleak and boisterous night, and the wind whistled shrilly down the long street. Many people were moving to and fro, most of them muffled in their coats and cravats.
I tried to draw my companion's attention to them, but he gave a little ejaculation of impatience and continued to stare into the street.
At last, as midnight approached and the street gradually cleared, he paced up and down the room in uncontrollable agitation.
I was about to make some remark to him when I raised my eyes to the lighted window and again experienced almost as great a surprise as before.
Three years had certainly not smoothed the asperities of his temper or his impatience with a less active intelligence than his own.
"Of course it has moved," said he. "Am I such a farcical bungler, Watson, that I should erect an obvious dummy and expect that some of the sharpest men in Europe would be deceived by it?
We have been in this room two hours, and Mrs. Hudson has made some change in that figure eight times, or once in every quarter of an hour.
She works it from the front so that her shadow may never be seen. Ah!" He drew in his breath with a shrill, excited intake.
In the dim light I saw his head thrown forward, his whole attitude rigid with attention. Outside, the street was absolutely deserted.
Again in the utter silence I heard that thin, sibilant note which spoke of intense suppressed excitement.
An instant later he pulled me back into the blackest corner of the room, and I felt his warning hand upon my lips.
The fingers which clutched me were quivering. Never had I known my friend more moved, and yet the dark street still stretched lonely and motionless before us.
A door opened and shut. An instant later steps crept down the passage--steps which were meant to be silent, but which reverberated harshly through the empty house.
Holmes crouched back against the wall and I did the same, my hand closing upon the handle of my revolver.
Peering through the gloom, I saw the vague outline of a man, a shade blacker than the blackness of the open door.
He passed close beside us, stole over to the window, and very softly and noiselessly raised it for half a foot.
As he sank to the level of this opening the light of the street, no longer dimmed by the dusty glass, fell full upon his face.
The man seemed to be beside himself with excitement. His two eyes shone like stars and his features were working convulsively.
He was an elderly man, with a thin, projecting nose, a high, bald forehead, and a huge grizzled moustache.
An opera-hat was pushed to the back of his head, and an evening dress shirt-front gleamed out through his open overcoat.
His face was gaunt and swarthy, scored with deep, savage lines. In his hand he carried what appeared to be a stick, but as he laid it down upon the floor it gave a metallic clang.
Then from the pocket of his overcoat he drew a bulky object, and he busied himself in some task which ended with a loud, sharp click, as if a spring or bolt had fallen into its place.
He straightened himself then, and I saw that what he held in his hand was a sort of gun, with a curiously misshapen butt.
I heard a little sigh of satisfaction as he cuddled the butt into his shoulder, and saw that amazing target, the black man on the yellow ground, standing clear at the end of his fore sight.
For an instant he was rigid and motionless. Then his finger tightened on the trigger. There was a strange, loud whiz and a long, silvery tinkle of broken glass.
At that instant Holmes sprang like a tiger on to the marksman's back and hurled him flat upon his face.
He was up again in a moment, and with convulsive strength he seized Holmes by the throat; but I struck him on the head with the butt of my revolver and he dropped again upon the floor.
I fell upon him, and as I held him my comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle. There was the clatter of running feet upon the pavement, and two policemen in uniform, with one plain-clothes detective, rushed through the front entrance and into the room.
I think you want a little unofficial help. Three undetected murders in one year won't do, Lestrade. But you handled the Molesey Mystery with less than your usual--that's to say, you handled it fairly well.
We had all risen to our feet, our prisoner breathing hard, with a stalwart constable on each side of him.
Already a few loiterers had begun to collect in the street. Holmes stepped up to the window, closed it, and dropped the blinds.
Lestrade had produced two candles and the policemen had uncovered their lanterns. I was able at last to have a good look at our prisoner.
He took no heed of any of us, but his eyes were fixed upon Holmes's face with an expression in which hatred and amazement were equally blended.
"Ah, Colonel!" said Holmes, arranging his rumpled collar; "'journeys end in lovers' meetings,' as the old play says.
I don't think I have had the pleasure of seeing you since you favoured me with those attentions as I lay on the ledge above the Reichenbach Fall.
The Colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance. "You cunning, cunning fiend!" was all that he could say.
"I have not introduced you yet," said Holmes. "This, gentlemen, is Colonel Sebastian Moran, once of Her Majesty's Indian Army, and the best heavy game shot that our Eastern Empire has ever produced.
The fierce old man said nothing, but still glared at my companion; with his savage eyes and bristling moustache he was wonderfully like a tiger himself.
"I wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old a shikari," said Holmes. "It must be very familiar to you.
Have you not tethered a young kid under a tree, lain above it with your rifle, and waited for the bait to bring up your tiger?
This empty house is my tree and you are my tiger. You have possibly had other guns in reserve in case there should be several tigers, or in the unlikely supposition of your own aim failing you.
Colonel Moran sprang forward, with a snarl of rage, but the constables dragged him back. The fury upon his face was terrible to look at.
"I confess that you had one small surprise for me," said Holmes. "I did not anticipate that you would yourself make use of this empty house and this convenient front window.
I had imagined you as operating from the street, where my friend Lestrade and his merry men were awaiting you.
"You may or may not have just cause for arresting me," said he, "but at least there can be no reason why I should submit to the gibes of this person.
"Well, that's reasonable enough," said Lestrade. "Nothing further you have to say, Mr. Holmes, before we go?"
"An admirable and unique weapon," said he, "noiseless and of tremendous power. I knew Von Herder, the blind German mechanic, who constructed it to the order of the late Professor Moriarty.
For years I have been aware of its existence, though I have never before had the opportunity of handling it.
"You can trust us to look after that, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, as the whole party moved towards the door.
Not so, Lestrade. I do not propose to appear in the matter at all. To you, and to you only, belongs the credit of the remarkable arrest which you have effected.
Yes, Lestrade, I congratulate you! With your usual happy mixture of cunning and audacity you have got him.
Our old chambers had been left unchanged through the supervision of Mycroft Holmes and the immediate care of Mrs. Hudson.
As I entered I saw, it is true, an unwonted tidiness, but the old landmarks were all in their place. There were the chemical corner and the acid-stained, deal-topped table.
There upon a shelf was the row of formidable scrap-books and books of reference which many of our fellow-citizens would have been so glad to burn.
The diagrams, the violin-case, and the pipe-rack--even the Persian slipper which contained the tobacco--all met my eyes as I glanced round me.
There were two occupants of the room--one Mrs. Hudson, who beamed upon us both as we entered; the other the strange dummy which had played so important a part in the evening's adventures.
It was a wax-coloured model of my friend, so admirably done that it was a perfect facsimile. It stood on a small pedestal table with an old dressing-gown of Holmes's so draped round it that the illusion from the street was absolutely perfect.
Yes, sir. I'm afraid it has spoilt your beautiful bust, for it passed right through the head and flattened itself on the wall.
Holmes held it out to me. "A soft revolver bullet, as you perceive, Watson. There's genius in that, for who would expect to find such a thing fired from an air-gun.
All right, Mrs. Hudson, I am much obliged for your assistance. And now, Watson, let me see you in your old seat once more, for there are several points which I should like to discuss with you.
He had thrown off the seedy frock-coat, and now he was the Holmes of old in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown which he took from his effigy.
"The old shikari's nerves have not lost their steadiness nor his eyes their keenness," said he, with a laugh, as he inspected the shattered forehead of his bust.
Plumb in the middle of the back of the head and smack through the brain. He was the best shot in India, and I expect that there are few better in London.
Well, well, such is fame! But, then, if I remember aright, you had not heard the name of Professor James Moriarty, who had one of the great brains of the century.
"My collection of M's is a fine one," said he. "Moriarty himself is enough to make any letter illustrious, and here is Morgan the poisoner, and Merridew of abominable memory, and Mathews, who knocked out my left canine in the waiting-room at Charing Cross, and, finally, here is our friend of to-night."
He handed over the book, and I read: "MORAN, SEBASTIAN, COLONEL. Unemployed. Formerly 1st Bengalore Pioneers.
Born London, 1840. Son of Sir Augustus Moran, C.B., once British Minister to Persia. Educated Eton and Oxford.
Served in Jowaki Campaign, Afghan Campaign, Charasiab (despatches), Sherpur, and Cabul. Author of 'Heavy Game of the Western Himalayas,' 1881; 'Three Months in the Jungle,' 1884.
"This is astonishing," said I, as I handed back the volume. "The man's career is that of an honourable soldier."
There are some trees, Watson, which grow to a certain height and then suddenly develop some unsightly eccentricity.
You may think that I read the papers with some attention during my sojourn in France, on the look-out for any chance of laying him by the heels.
So long as he was free in London my life would really not have been worth living. Night and day the shadow would have been over me, and sooner or later his chance must have come.
What could I do? I could not shoot him at sight, or I should myself be in the dock. There was no use appealing to a magistrate.
They cannot interfere on the strength of what would appear to them to be a wild suspicion. So I could do nothing.
But I watched the criminal news, knowing that sooner or later I should get him. Then came the death of this Ronald Adair.
There was not a doubt of it. The bullets alone are enough to put his head in a noose. I came over at once.
I was seen by the sentinel, who would, I knew, direct the Colonel's attention to my presence. He could not fail to connect my sudden return with his crime and to be terribly alarmed.
I was sure that he would make an attempt to get me out of the way AT ONCE, and would bring round his murderous weapon for that purpose.
"Yes," said I. "You have not made it clear what was Colonel Moran's motive in murdering the Honourable Ronald Adair."
Ah! my dear Watson, there we come into those realms of conjecture where the most logical mind may be at fault.
Each may form his own hypothesis upon the present evidence, and yours is as likely to be correct as mine.
I think that it is not difficult to explain the facts. It came out in evidence that Colonel Moran and young Adair had between them won a considerable amount of money.
Now, Moran undoubtedly played foul--of that I have long been aware. I believe that on the day of the murder Adair had discovered that Moran was cheating.
Very likely he had spoken to him privately, and had threatened to expose him unless he voluntarily resigned his membership of the club and promised not to play cards again.
It is unlikely that a youngster like Adair would at once make a hideous scandal by exposing a well-known man so much older than himself.
Probably he acted as I suggest. The exclusion from his clubs would mean ruin to Moran, who lived by his ill-gotten card gains.
He therefore murdered Adair, who at the time was endeavouring to work out how much money he should himself return, since he could not profit by his partner's foul play.
He locked the door lest the ladies should surprise him and insist upon knowing what he was doing with these names and coins.
It will be verified or disproved at the trial. Meanwhile, come what may, Colonel Moran will trouble us no more, the famous air-gun of Von Herder will embellish the Scotland Yard Museum, and once again Mr. Sherlock Holmes is free to devote his life to examining those interesting little problems which the complex life of London so plentifully presents.
"FROM the point of view of the criminal expert," said Mr. Sherlock Holmes, "London has become a singularly uninteresting city since the death of the late lamented Professor Moriarty."
"Well, well, I must not be selfish," said he, with a smile, as he pushed back his chair from the breakfast-table.
The community is certainly the gainer, and no one the loser, save the poor out-of-work specialist, whose occupation has gone.
Petty thefts, wanton assaults, purposeless outrage--to the man who held the clue all could be worked into one connected whole.
To the scientific student of the higher criminal world no capital in Europe offered the advantages which London then possessed.
But now----" He shrugged his shoulders in humorous deprecation of the state of things which he had himself done so much to produce.
At the time of which I speak Holmes had been back for some months, and I, at his request, had sold my practice and returned to share the old quarters in Baker Street.
A young doctor, named Verner, had purchased my small Kensington practice, and given with astonishingly little demur the highest price that I ventured to ask--an incident which only explained itself some years later when I found that Verner was a distant relation of Holmes's, and that it was my friend who had really found the money.
His cold and proud nature was always averse, however, to anything in the shape of public applause, and he bound me in the most stringent terms to say no further word of himself, his methods, or his successes--a prohibition which, as I have explained, has only now been removed.
He looked from one to the other of us, and under our gaze of inquiry he became conscious that some apology was needed for this unceremonious entry.
"I'm sorry, Mr. Holmes," he cried. "You mustn't blame me. I am nearly mad. Mr. Holmes, I am the unhappy John Hector McFarlane."
He made the announcement as if the name alone would explain both his visit and its manner; but I could see by my companion's unresponsive face that it meant no more to him than to me.
"Have a cigarette, Mr. McFarlane," said he, pushing his case across. "I am sure that with your symptoms my friend Dr. Watson here would prescribe a sedative.
You mentioned your name as if I should recognise it, but I assure you that, beyond the obvious facts that you are a bachelor, a solicitor, a Freemason, and an asthmatic, I know nothing whatever about you.
Yes, I am all that, Mr. Holmes, and in addition I am the most unfortunate man at this moment in London.
For Heaven's sake don't abandon me, Mr. Holmes! If they come to arrest me before I have finished my story, make them give me time so that I may tell you the whole truth.
"Arrest you!" said Holmes. "This is really most grati--most interesting. On what charge do you expect to be arrested?"
My companion's expressive face showed a sympathy which was not, I am afraid, entirely unmixed with satisfaction.
"Dear me," said he; "it was only this moment at breakfast that I was saying to my friend, Dr. Watson, that sensational cases had disappeared out of our papers."
Our visitor stretched forward a quivering hand and picked up the DAILY TELEGRAPH, which still lay upon Holmes's knee.
If you had looked at it, sir, you would have seen at a glance what the errand is on which I have come to you this morning.
I feel as if my name and my misfortune must be in every man's mouth." He turned it over to expose the central page.
Here it is, and with your permission I will read it to you. Listen to this, Mr. Holmes. The head-lines are: 'Mysterious Affair at Lower Norwood.
I have been followed from London Bridge Station, and I am sure that they are only waiting for the warrant to arrest me.
It will break my mother's heart--it will break her heart!" He wrung his hands in an agony of apprehension, and swayed backwards and forwards in his chair.
I looked with interest upon this man, who was accused of being the perpetrator of a crime of violence.
He was flaxen-haired and handsome in a washed-out negative fashion, with frightened blue eyes and a clean-shaven face, with a weak, sensitive mouth.
His age may have been about twenty-seven; his dress and bearing that of a gentleman. From the pocket of his light summer overcoat protruded the bundle of endorsed papers which proclaimed his profession.
"We must use what time we have," said Holmes. "Watson, would you have the kindness to take the paper and to read me the paragraph in question?"
Underneath the vigorous head-lines which our client had quoted I read the following suggestive narrative:--
Late last night, or early this morning, an incident occurred at Lower Norwood which points, it is feared, to a serious crime.
Mr. Jonas Oldacre is a well-known resident of that suburb, where he has carried on his business as a builder for many years.
Mr. Oldacre is a bachelor, fifty-two years of age, and lives in Deep Dene House, at the Sydenham end of the road of that name.
A small timber-yard still exists, however, at the back of the house, and last night, about twelve o'clock, an alarm was given that one of the stacks was on fire.
The engines were soon upon the spot, but the dry wood burned with great fury, and it was impossible to arrest the conflagration until the stack had been entirely consumed.
Up to this point the incident bore the appearance of an ordinary accident, but fresh indications seem to point to serious crime.
Surprise was expressed at the absence of the master of the establishment from the scene of the fire, and an inquiry followed, which showed that he had disappeared from the house.
The police believe that they have evidence in their possession which supplies a very convincing motive for the crime, and altogether it cannot be doubted that sensational developments will follow.
LATER.--It is rumoured as we go to press that Mr. John Hector McFarlane has actually been arrested on the charge of the murder of Mr. Jonas Oldacre.
It is at least certain that a warrant has been issued. There have been further and sinister developments in the investigation at Norwood.
The conduct of the criminal investigation has been left in the experienced hands of Inspector Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, who is following up the clues with his accustomed energy and sagacity.
"The case has certainly some points of interest," said he, in his languid fashion. "May I ask, in the first place, Mr. McFarlane, how it is that you are still at liberty, since there appears to be enough evidence to justify your arrest?"
I knew nothing of this affair until I was in the train, when I read what you have just heard. I at once saw the horrible danger of my position, and I hurried to put the case into your hands.
I have no doubt that I should have been arrested either at my City office or at my home. A man followed me from London Bridge Station, and I have no doubt--Great Heaven, what is that?
It was a clang of the bell, followed instantly by heavy steps upon the stair. A moment later our old friend Lestrade appeared in the doorway.
McFarlane turned to us with a gesture of despair, and sank into his chair once more like one who is crushed.
"One moment, Lestrade," said Holmes. "Half an hour more or less can make no difference to you, and the gentleman was about to give us an account of this very interesting affair, which might aid us in clearing it up."
"Well, Mr. Holmes, it is difficult for me to refuse you anything, for you have been of use to the force once or twice in the past, and we owe you a good turn at Scotland Yard," said Lestrade.
At the same time I must remain with my prisoner, and I am bound to warn him that anything he may say will appear in evidence against him.
"I wish nothing better," said our client. "All I ask is that you should hear and recognise the absolute truth."
You can imagine, Mr. Holmes, that I was not in a humour to refuse him anything that he might ask. He was my benefactor, and all my desire was to carry out his wishes in every particular.
I sent a telegram home, therefore, to say that I had important business on hand, and that it was impossible for me to say how late I might be.
Mr. Oldacre had told me that he would like me to have supper with him at nine, as he might not be home before that hour.
I had some difficulty in finding his house, however, and it was nearly half-past before I reached it.
I was shown by this woman into a sitting-room, where a frugal supper was laid out. Afterwards Mr. Jonas Oldacre led me into his bedroom, in which there stood a heavy safe.
This he opened and took out a mass of documents, which we went over together. It was between eleven and twelve when we finished.
He remarked that we must not disturb the housekeeper. He showed me out through his own French window, which had been open all this time.
I will not be sure, but I believe that it was only half down. Yes, I remember how he pulled it up in order to swing open the window.
I could not find my stick, and he said, 'Never mind, my boy; I shall see a good deal of you now, I hope, and I will keep your stick until you come back to claim it.'
I left him there, the safe open, and the papers made up in packets upon the table. It was so late that I could not get back to Blackheath, so I spent the night at the Anerley Arms, and I knew nothing more until I read of this horrible affair in the morning.
"Anything more that you would like to ask, Mr. Holmes?" said Lestrade, whose eyebrows had gone up once or twice during this remarkable explanation.
"I think I should like to have a word with you presently, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said he. "Now, Mr. McFarlane, two of my constables are at the door and there is a four-wheeler waiting."
The wretched young man arose, and with a last beseeching glance at us walked from the room. The officers conducted him to the cab, but Lestrade remained.
Holmes had picked up the pages which formed the rough draft of the will, and was looking at them with the keenest interest upon his face.
I can read the first few lines, and these in the middle of the second page, and one or two at the end.
Those are as clear as print," said he; "but the writing in between is very bad, and there are three places where I cannot read it at all."
That it was written in a train; the good writing represents stations, the bad writing movement, and the very bad writing passing over points.
A scientific expert would pronounce at once that this was drawn up on a suburban line, since nowhere save in the immediate vicinity of a great city could there be so quick a succession of points.
Granting that his whole journey was occupied in drawing up the will, then the train was an express, only stopping once between Norwood and London Bridge.
"You are too many for me when you begin to get on your theories, Mr. Holmes," said he. "How does this bear on the case?"
Well, it corroborates the young man's story to the extent that the will was drawn up by Jonas Oldacre in his journey yesterday.
It is curious--is it not?--that a man should draw up so important a document in so haphazard a fashion.
It suggests that he did not think it was going to be of much practical importance. If a man drew up a will which he did not intend ever to be effective he might do it so.
Not clear? Well, if that isn't clear, what COULD be clear? Here is a young man who learns suddenly that if a certain older man dies he will succeed to a fortune.
And, finally, would you take the great pains to conceal the body and yet leave your own stick as a sign that you were the criminal?
As to the stick, Mr. Holmes, you know as well as I do that a criminal is often flurried and does things which a cool man would avoid.
"I could very easily give you half-a-dozen," said Holmes. "Here, for example, is a very possible and even probable one.
I make you a free present of it. The older man is showing documents which are of evident value. A passing tramp sees them through the window, the blind of which is only half down.
Exit the solicitor. Enter the tramp! He seizes a stick, which he observes there, kills Oldacre, and departs after burning the body.
Lestrade shook his head, though it seemed to me that his manner was less absolutely assured than before.
Well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you may look for your tramp, and while you are finding him we will hold on to our man.
The future will show which is right. Just notice this point, Mr. Holmes: that so far as we know none of the papers were removed, and that the prisoner is the one man in the world who had no reason for removing them, since he was heir-at-law and would come into them in any case.
"I don't mean to deny that the evidence is in some ways very strongly in favour of your theory," said he.
I only wish to point out that there are other theories possible. As you say, the future will decide.
Good morning! I dare say that in the course of the day I shall drop in at Norwood and see how you are getting on.
When the detective departed my friend rose and made his preparations for the day's work with the alert air of a man who has a congenial task before him.
"My first movement, Watson," said he, as he bustled into his frock-coat, "must, as I said, be in the direction of Blackheath."
Because we have in this case one singular incident coming close to the heels of another singular incident.
The police are making the mistake of concentrating their attention upon the second, because it happens to be the one which is actually criminal.
But it is evident to me that the logical way to approach the case is to begin by trying to throw some light upon the first incident--the curious will, so suddenly made, and to so unexpected an heir.
It may do something to simplify what followed. No, my dear fellow, I don't think you can help me. There is no prospect of danger, or I should not dream of stirring out without you.
I trust that when I see you in the evening I will be able to report that I have been able to do something for this unfortunate youngster who has thrown himself upon my protection.
It was late when my friend returned, and I could see by a glance at his haggard and anxious face that the high hopes with which he had started had not been fulfilled.
For an hour he droned away upon his violin, endeavouring to soothe his own ruffled spirits. At last he flung down the instrument and plunged into a detailed account of his misadventures.
It's all going wrong, Watson--all as wrong as it can go. I kept a bold face before Lestrade, but, upon my soul, I believe that for once the fellow is on the right track and we are on the wrong.
All my instincts are one way and all the facts are the other, and I much fear that British juries have not yet attained that pitch of intelligence when they will give the preference to my theories over Lestrade's facts.
"So, my dear Watson, there's my report of a failure. And yet--and yet--"--he clenched his thin hands in a paroxysm of conviction--"I KNOW it's all wrong.
I feel it in my bones. There is something that has not come out, and that housekeeper knows it. There was a sort of sulky defiance in her eyes, which only goes with guilty knowledge.
However, there's no good talking any more about it, Watson; but unless some lucky chance comes our way I fear that the Norwood Disappearance Case will not figure in that chronicle of our successes which I foresee that a patient public will sooner or later have to endure.
That is a dangerous argument, my dear Watson. You remember that terrible murderer, Bert Stevens, who wanted us to get him off in '87?
By the way, there is one curious little point about those papers which may serve us as the starting-point for an inquiry.
On looking over the bank-book I found that the low state of the balance was principally due to large cheques which have been made out during the last year to Mr. Cornelius.
I confess that I should be interested to know who this Mr. Cornelius may be with whom a retired builder has such very large transactions.
Is it possible that he has had a hand in the affair? Cornelius might be a broker, but we have found no scrip to correspond with these large payments.
Failing any other indication my researches must now take the direction of an inquiry at the bank for the gentleman who has cashed these cheques.
But I fear, my dear fellow, that our case will end ingloriously by Lestrade hanging our client, which will certainly be a triumph for Scotland Yard.
I do not know how far Sherlock Holmes took any sleep that night, but when I came down to breakfast I found him pale and harassed, his bright eyes the brighter for the dark shadows round them.
The carpet round his chair was littered with cigarette-ends and with the early editions of the morning papers.
IMPORTANT FRESH EVIDENCE TO HAND. MCFARLANE'S GUILT DEFINITELY ESTABLISHED. ADVISE YOU TO ABANDON CASE.
"It is Lestrade's little cock-a-doodle of victory," Holmes answered, with a bitter smile. "And yet it may be premature to abandon the case.
After all, important fresh evidence is a two-edged thing, and may possibly cut in a very different direction to that which Lestrade imagines.
Take your breakfast, Watson, and we will go out together and see what we can do. I feel as if I shall need your company and your moral support to-day.
"At present I cannot spare energy and nerve force for digestion," he would say in answer to my medical remonstrances.
I was not surprised, therefore, when this morning he left his untouched meal behind him and started with me for Norwood.
A crowd of morbid sightseers were still gathered round Deep Dene House, which was just such a suburban villa as I had pictured.
But we formed ours yesterday, and now it proves to be correct; so you must acknowledge that we have been a little in front of you this time, Mr. Holmes.
"You don't like being beaten any more than the rest of us do," said he. "A man can't expect always to have it his own way, can he, Dr. Watson?
Step this way, if you please, gentlemen, and I think I can convince you once for all that it was John McFarlane who did this crime.
"This is where young McFarlane must have come out to get his hat after the crime was done," said he. "Now, look at this."
With dramatic suddenness he struck a match and by its light exposed a stain of blood upon the whitewashed wall.
As he held the match nearer I saw that it was more than a stain. It was the well-marked print of a thumb.
Well, then, will you please compare that print with this wax impression of young McFarlane's right thumb, taken by my orders this morning?
As he held the waxen print close to the blood-stain it did not take a magnifying glass to see that the two were undoubtedly from the same thumb.
Something in his tone caught my ear, and I turned to look at him. An extraordinary change had come over his face.
It was writhing with inward merriment. His two eyes were shining like stars. It seemed to me that he was making desperate efforts to restrain a convulsive attack of laughter.
"Dear me! Dear me!" he said at last. "Well, now, who would have thought it? And how deceptive appearances may be, to be sure!
Such a nice young man to look at! It is a lesson to us not to trust our own judgment, is it not, Lestrade?
"Yes, some of us are a little too much inclined to be cocksure, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade. The man's insolence was maddening, but we could not resent it.
What a providential thing that this young man should press his right thumb against the wall in taking his hat from the peg!
Such a very natural action, too, if you come to think of it." Holmes was outwardly calm, but his whole body gave a wriggle of suppressed excitement as he spoke.
He remained on guard in the bedroom where the crime was committed, so as to see that nothing was touched.
Well, we had no particular reason to make a careful examination of the hall. Besides, it's not in a very prominent place, as you see.
Lestrade looked at Holmes as if he thought he was going out of his mind. I confess that I was myself surprised both at his hilarious manner and at his rather wild observation.
"I don't know whether you think that McFarlane came out of gaol in the dead of the night in order to strengthen the evidence against himself," said Lestrade.
"There, that's enough," said Lestrade. "I am a practical man, Mr. Holmes, and when I have got my evidence I come to my conclusions.
Holmes had recovered his equanimity, though I still seemed to detect gleams of amusement in his expression.
"Dear me, this is a very sad development, Watson, is it not?" said he. "And yet there are singular points about it which hold out some hopes for our client."
I would hardly go so far as to say that, my dear Watson. The fact is that there is one really serious flaw in this evidence to which our friend attaches so much importance.
Only this: that I KNOW that that mark was not there when I examined the hall yesterday. And now, Watson, let us have a little stroll round in the sunshine.
With a confused brain, but with a heart into which some warmth of hope was returning, I accompanied my friend in a walk round the garden.
Holmes took each face of the house in turn and examined it with great interest. He then led the way inside and went over the whole building from basement to attics.
Most of the rooms were unfurnished, but none the less Holmes inspected them all minutely. Finally, on the top corridor, which ran outside three untenanted bedrooms, he again was seized with a spasm of merriment.
"There are really some very unique features about this case, Watson," said he. "I think it is time now that we took our friend Lestrade into our confidence.
He has had his little smile at our expense, and perhaps we may do as much by him if my reading of this problem proves to be correct.
Don't you think it may be a little premature? I can't help thinking that your evidence is not complete.
Lestrade knew my friend too well to disregard his words. He laid down his pen and looked curiously at him.
"Perhaps I can help you to see that and one or two other things as well," said Holmes. "Kindly summon your men, and I will try."
"In the outhouse you will find a considerable quantity of straw," said Holmes. "I will ask you to carry in two bundles of it.
I think it will be of the greatest assistance in producing the witness whom I require. Thank you very much.
I believe you have some matches in your pocket, Watson. Now, Mr. Lestrade, I will ask you all to accompany me to the top landing.
Would you kindly send one of your constables for two buckets of water? Put the straw on the floor here, free from the wall on either side.
"I don't know whether you are playing a game with us, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said he. "If you know anything, you can surely say it without all this tomfoolery."
I did so, and, driven by the draught, a coil of grey smoke swirled down the corridor, while the dry straw crackled and flamed.
Now we must see if we can find this witness for you, Lestrade. Might I ask you all to join in the cry of 'Fire!'?
It had hardly died away when an amazing thing happened. A door suddenly flew open out of what appeared to be solid wall at the end of the corridor, and a little, wizened man darted out of it, like a rabbit out of its burrow.
"Capital!" said Holmes, calmly. "Watson, a bucket of water over the straw. That will do! Lestrade, allow me to present you with your principal missing witness, Mr. Jonas Oldacre."
The detective stared at the new-comer with blank amazement. The latter was blinking in the bright light of the corridor, and peering at us and at the smouldering fire.
No harm? You have done your best to get an innocent man hanged. If it wasn't for this gentleman here, I am not sure that you would not have succeeded.
Oh! a joke, was it? You won't find the laugh on your side, I promise you. Take him down and keep him in the sitting-room until I come.
You have saved an innocent man's life, and you have prevented a very grave scandal, which would have ruined my reputation in the Force.
Instead of being ruined, my good sir, you will find that your reputation has been enormously enhanced.
Just make a few alterations in that report which you were writing, and they will understand how hard it is to throw dust in the eyes of Inspector Lestrade.
Not at all. The work is its own reward. Perhaps I shall get the credit also at some distant day when I permit my zealous historian to lay out his foolscap once more--eh, Watson?
A lath-and-plaster partition had been run across the passage six feet from the end, with a door cunningly concealed in it.
It was lit within by slits under the eaves. A few articles of furniture and a supply of food and water were within, together with a number of books and papers.
"There's the advantage of being a builder," said Holmes, as we came out. "He was able to fix up his own little hiding-place without any confederate--save, of course, that precious housekeeper of his, whom I should lose no time in adding to your bag, Lestrade."
I made up my mind that the fellow was in hiding in the house. When I paced one corridor and found it six feet shorter than the corresponding one below, it was pretty clear where he was.
I thought he had not the nerve to lie quiet before an alarm of fire. We could, of course, have gone in and taken him, but it amused me to make him reveal himself; besides, I owed you a little mystification, Lestrade, for your chaff in the morning.
Well, sir, you certainly got equal with me on that. But how in the world did you know that he was in the house at all?
The thumb-mark, Lestrade. You said it was final; and so it was, in a very different sense. I knew it had not been there the day before.
I pay a good deal of attention to matters of detail, as you may have observed, and I had examined the hall and was sure that the wall was clear.
Very simply. When those packets were sealed up, Jonas Oldacre got McFarlane to secure one of the seals by putting his thumb upon the soft wax.
It would be done so quickly and so naturally that I dare say the young man himself has no recollection of it.
If you examine among those documents which he took with him into his retreat I will lay you a wager that you find the seal with the thumb-mark upon it.
"Wonderful!" said Lestrade. "Wonderful! It's all as clear as crystal, as you put it. But what is the object of this deep deception, Mr.
It was amusing to me to see how the detective's overbearing manner had changed suddenly to that of a child asking questions of its teacher.
Well, I don't think that is very hard to explain. A very deep, malicious, vindictive person is the gentleman who is now awaiting us downstairs.
You know that he was once refused by McFarlane's mother? You don't! I told you that you should go to Blackheath first and Norwood afterwards.
Well, this injury, as he would consider it, has rankled in his wicked, scheming brain, and all his life he has longed for vengeance, but never seen his chance.
During the last year or two things have gone against him--secret speculation, I think--and he finds himself in a bad way.
He determines to swindle his creditors, and for this purpose he pays large cheques to a certain Mr. Cornelius, who is, I imagine, himself under another name.
I have not traced these cheques yet, but I have no doubt that they were banked under that name at some provincial town where Oldacre from time to time led a double existence.
He intended to change his name altogether, draw this money, and vanish, starting life again elsewhere.
It was a net from which it seemed to me a few hours ago that there was no possible escape. But he had not that supreme gift of the artist, the knowledge of when to stop.
He wished to improve that which was already perfect--to draw the rope tighter yet round the neck of his unfortunate victim--and so he ruined all.
"That's for a jury to decide," said Lestrade. "Anyhow, we shall have you on a charge of conspiracy, if not for attempted murder."
"And you'll probably find that your creditors will impound the banking account of Mr. Cornelius," said Holmes.
"I fancy that for some few years you will find your time very fully occupied," said he. "By the way, what was it you put into the wood-pile besides your old trousers?
A dead dog, or rabbits, or what? You won't tell? Dear me, how very unkind of you! Well, well, I dare say that a couple of rabbits would account both for the blood and for the charred ashes.
HOLMES had been seated for some hours in silence with his long, thin back curved over a chemical vessel in which he was brewing a particularly malodorous product.
His head was sunk upon his breast, and he looked from my point of view like a strange, lank bird, with dull grey plumage and a black top-knot.
I gave a start of astonishment. Accustomed as I was to Holmes's curious faculties, this sudden intrusion into my most intimate thoughts was utterly inexplicable.
He wheeled round upon his stool, with a steaming test-tube in his hand and a gleam of amusement in his deep-set eyes.
Now, it was not really difficult, by an inspection of the groove between your left forefinger and thumb, to feel sure that you did NOT propose to invest your small capital in the goldfields.
Very likely not; but I can quickly show you a close connection. Here are the missing links of the very simple chain: 1.
You had chalk between your left finger and thumb when you returned from the club last night. 2. You put chalk there when you play billiards to steady the cue.
"Quite so!" said he, a little nettled. "Every problem becomes very childish when once it is explained to you.
Here is an unexplained one. See what you can make of that, friend Watson." He tossed a sheet of paper upon the table and turned once more to his chemical analysis.
That is what Mr. Hilton Cubitt, of Riding Thorpe Manor, Norfolk, is very anxious to know. This little conundrum came by the first post, and he was to follow by the next train.
He seemed to bring a whiff of his strong, fresh, bracing, east-coast air with him as he entered. Having shaken hands with each of us, he was about to sit down when his eye rested upon the paper with the curious markings, which I had just examined and left upon the table.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, what do you make of these?" he cried. "They told me that you were fond of queer mysteries, and I don't think you can find a queerer one than that.
"It is certainly rather a curious production," said Holmes. "At first sight it would appear to be some childish prank.
It consists of a number of absurd little figures dancing across the paper upon which they are drawn. Why should you attribute any importance to so grotesque an object?
I never should, Mr. Holmes. But my wife does. It is frightening her to death. She says nothing, but I can see terror in her eyes.
Holmes held up the paper so that the sunlight shone full upon it. It was a page torn from a note-book.
Holmes examined it for some time, and then, folding it carefully up, he placed it in his pocket-book.
They were scrawled with chalk. I thought that it was the stable-boy who had drawn them, but the lad swore he knew nothing about it.
Anyhow, they had come there during the night. I had them washed out, and I only mentioned the matter to my wife afterwards.
I showed it to Elsie, and down she dropped in a dead faint. Since then she has looked like a woman in a dream, half dazed, and with terror always lurking in her eyes.
It was then that I wrote and sent the paper to you, Mr. Holmes. It was not a thing that I could take to the police, for they would have laughed at me, but you will tell me what to do.
I am not a rich man; but if there is any danger threatening my little woman I would spend my last copper to shield her.
He was a fine creature, this man of the old English soil, simple, straight, and gentle, with his great, earnest blue eyes and broad, comely face.
His love for his wife and his trust in her shone in his features. Holmes had listened to his story with the utmost attention, and now he sat for some time in silent thought.
"Don't you think, Mr. Cubitt," said he, at last, "that your best plan would be to make a direct appeal to your wife, and to ask her to share her secret with you?"
A promise is a promise, Mr. Holmes. If Elsie wished to tell me she would. If not, it is not for me to force her confidence.
Then I will help you with all my heart. In the first place, have you heard of any strangers being seen in your neighbourhood?
In the immediate neighbourhood, yes. But we have several small watering-places not very far away. And the farmers take in lodgers.
These hieroglyphics have evidently a meaning. If it is a purely arbitrary one it may be impossible for us to solve it.
I would suggest that you return to Norfolk, that you keep a keen look-out, and that you take an exact copy of any fresh dancing men which may appear.
It is a thousand pities that we have not a reproduction of those which were done in chalk upon the window-sill.
Make a discreet inquiry also as to any strangers in the neighbourhood. When you have collected some fresh evidence come to me again.
That is the best advice which I can give you, Mr. Hilton Cubitt. If there are any pressing fresh developments I shall be always ready to run down and see you in your Norfolk home.
He made no allusion to the affair, however, until one afternoon a fortnight or so later. I was going out when he called me back.
Because I had a wire from Hilton Cubitt this morning--you remember Hilton Cubitt, of the dancing men?
He was to reach Liverpool Street at one-twenty. He may be here at any moment. I gather from his wire that there have been some new incidents of importance.
We had not long to wait, for our Norfolk squire came straight from the station as fast as a hansom could bring him.
"It's getting on my nerves, this business, Mr. Holmes," said he, as he sank, like a wearied man, into an arm-chair.
No, Mr. Holmes, she has not. And yet there have been times when the poor girl has wanted to speak, and yet could not quite bring herself to take the plunge.
I have tried to help her; but I dare say I did it clumsily, and scared her off from it. She has spoken about my old family, and our reputation in the county, and our pride in our unsullied honour, and I always felt it was leading to the point; but somehow it turned off before we got there.
A good deal, Mr. Holmes. I have several fresh dancing men pictures for you to examine, and, what is more important, I have seen the fellow.
Yes, I saw him at his work. But I will tell you everything in order. When I got back after my visit to you, the very first thing I saw next morning was a fresh crop of dancing men.
They had been drawn in chalk upon the black wooden door of the tool-house, which stands beside the lawn in full view of the front windows.
I took an exact copy, and here it is." He unfolded a paper and laid it upon the table. Here is a copy of the hieroglyphics:--
When I had taken the copy I rubbed out the marks; but two mornings later a fresh inscription had appeared.
Suddenly, as she spoke, I saw her white face grow whiter yet in the moonlight, and her hand tightened upon my shoulder.
Something was moving in the shadow of the tool-house. I saw a dark, creeping figure which crawled round the corner and squatted in front of the door.
Seizing my pistol I was rushing out, when my wife threw her arms round me and held me with convulsive strength.
I tried to throw her off, but she clung to me most desperately. At last I got clear, but by the time I had opened the door and reached the house the creature was gone.
He had left a trace of his presence, however, for there on the door was the very same arrangement of dancing men which had already twice appeared, and which I have copied on that paper.
There was no other sign of the fellow anywhere, though I ran all over the grounds. And yet the amazing thing is that he must have been there all the time, for when I examined the door again in the morning he had scrawled some more of his pictures under the line which I had already seen.
"Tell me," said Holmes--and I could see by his eyes that he was much excited--"was this a mere addition to the first, or did it appear to be entirely separate?"
Excellent! This is far the most important of all for our purpose. It fills me with hopes. Now, Mr. Hilton Cubitt, please continue your most interesting statement.
I have nothing more to say, Mr. Holmes, except that I was angry with my wife that night for having held me back when I might have caught the skulking rascal.
But there is a tone in my wife's voice, Mr. Holmes, and a look in her eyes which forbid doubt, and I am sure that it was indeed my own safety that was in her mind.
There's the whole case, and now I want your advice as to what I ought to do. My own inclination is to put half-a-dozen of my farm lads in the shrubbery, and when this fellow comes again to give him such a hiding that he will leave us in peace for the future.
"I fear it is too deep a case for such simple remedies," said Holmes. "How long can you stay in London?"
I must go back to-day. I would not leave my wife alone all night for anything. She is very nervous and begged me to come back.
I dare say you are right. But if you could have stopped I might possibly have been able to return with you in a day or two.
Meanwhile you will leave me these papers, and I think that it is very likely that I shall be able to pay you a visit shortly and to throw some light upon your case.
Sherlock Holmes preserved his calm professional manner until our visitor had left us, although it was easy for me, who knew him so well, to see that he was profoundly excited.
For two hours I watched him as he covered sheet after sheet of paper with figures and letters, so completely absorbed in his task that he had evidently forgotten my presence.
Sometimes he was making progress and whistled and sang at his work; sometimes he was puzzled, and would sit for long spells with a furrowed brow and a vacant eye.
Finally he sprang from his chair with a cry of satisfaction, and walked up and down the room rubbing his hands together.
Then he wrote a long telegram upon a cable form. "If my answer to this is as I hope, you will have a very pretty case to add to your collection, Watson," said he.
I expect that we shall be able to go down to Norfolk to-morrow, and to take our friend some very definite news as to the secret of his annoyance.
I confess that I was filled with curiosity, but I was aware that Holmes liked to make his disclosures at his own time and in his own way; so I waited until it should suit him to take me into his confidence.
But there was a delay in that answering telegram, and two days of impatience followed, during which Holmes pricked up his ears at every ring of the bell.
On the evening of the second there came a letter from Hilton Cubitt. All was quiet with him, save that a long inscription had appeared that morning upon the pedestal of the sun-dial.
Holmes bent over this grotesque frieze for some minutes, and then suddenly sprang to his feet with an exclamation of surprise and dismay.
"Then we shall breakfast early and take the very first in the morning," said Holmes. "Our presence is most urgently needed.
Ah! here is our expected cablegram. One moment, Mrs. Hudson; there may be an answer. No, that is quite as I expected.
This message makes it even more essential that we should not lose an hour in letting Hilton Cubitt know how matters stand, for it is a singular and a dangerous web in which our simple Norfolk squire is entangled.
So, indeed, it proved, and as I come to the dark conclusion of a story which had seemed to me to be only childish and bizarre I experience once again the dismay and horror with which I was filled.
Would that I had some brighter ending to communicate to my readers, but these are the chronicles of fact, and I must follow to their dark crisis the strange chain of events which for some days made Ridling Thorpe Manor a household word through the length and breadth of England.
We had hardly alighted at North Walsham, and mentioned the name of our destination, when the station-master hurried towards us.
Because Inspector Martin from Norwich has just passed through. But maybe you are the surgeons. She's not dead--or wasn't by last accounts.
"We are going to Ridling Thorpe Manor," said he, "but we have heard nothing of what has passed there."
"It's a terrible business," said the station-master. "They are shot, both Mr. Hilton Cubitt and his wife.
She shot him and then herself--so the servants say. He's dead and her life is despaired of. Dear, dear, one of the oldest families in the County of Norfolk, and one of the most honoured.
Without a word Holmes hurried to a carriage, and during the long seven miles' drive he never opened his mouth.
As we drove up to the porticoed front door I observed in front of it, beside the tennis lawn, the black tool-house and the pedestalled sun-dial with which we had such strange associations.
A dapper little man, with a quick, alert manner and a waxed moustache, had just descended from a high dog-cart.
He introduced himself as Inspector Martin, of the Norfolk Constabulary, and he was considerably astonished when he heard the name of my companion.
Why, Mr. Holmes, the crime was only committed at three this morning. How could you hear of it in London and get to the spot as soon as I?
Then you must have important evidence of which we are ignorant, for they were said to be a most united couple.
In that case I should be glad to hear the evidence and to examine the premises without an instant of unnecessary delay.
Inspector Martin had the good sense to allow my friend to do things in his own fashion, and contented himself with carefully noting the results.
The local surgeon, an old, white-haired man, had just come down from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt's room, and he reported that her injuries were serious, but not necessarily fatal.
The bullet had passed through the front of her brain, and it would probably be some time before she could regain consciousness.
On the question of whether she had been shot or had shot herself he would not venture to express any decided opinion.
Certainly the bullet had been discharged at very close quarters. There was only the one pistol found in the room, two barrels of which had been emptied.
Mr. Hilton Cubitt had been shot through the heart. It was equally conceivable that he had shot her and then himself, or that she had been the criminal, for the revolver lay upon the floor midway between them.
The old hall, oak-panelled and high-windowed, had been turned into a court of investigation. Holmes sat in a great, old-fashioned chair, his inexorable eyes gleaming out of his haggard face.
I could read in them a set purpose to devote his life to this quest until the client whom he had failed to save should at last be avenged.
The trim Inspector Martin, the old, grey-headed country doctor, myself, and a stolid village policeman made up the rest of that strange company.
The two women told their story clearly enough. They had been aroused from their sleep by the sound of an explosion, which had been followed a minute later by a second one.
They slept in adjoining rooms, and Mrs. King had rushed in to Saunders. Together they had descended the stairs.
The door of the study was open and a candle was burning upon the table. Their master lay upon his face in the centre of the room.
He was quite dead. Near the window his wife was crouching, her head leaning against the wall. She was horribly wounded, and the side of her face was red with blood.
She breathed heavily, but was incapable of saying anything. The passage, as well as the room, was full of smoke and the smell of powder.
The window was certainly shut and fastened upon the inside. Both women were positive upon the point. They had at once sent for the doctor and for the constable.
Then, with the aid of the groom and the stable-boy, they had conveyed their injured mistress to her room.
Both she and her husband had occupied the bed. She was clad in her dress--he in his dressing-gown, over his night clothes.
Nothing had been moved in the study. So far as they knew there had never been any quarrel between husband and wife.
These were the main points of the servants' evidence. In answer to Inspector Martin they were clear that every door was fastened upon the inside, and that no one could have escaped from the house.
In answer to Holmes they both remembered that they were conscious of the smell of powder from the moment that they ran out of their rooms upon the top floor.
"I commend that fact very carefully to your attention," said Holmes to his professional colleague. "And now I think that we are in a position to undertake a thorough examination of the room."
The study proved to be a small chamber, lined on three sides with books, and with a writing-table facing an ordinary window, which looked out upon the garden.
Our first attention was given to the body of the unfortunate squire, whose huge frame lay stretched across the room.
His disordered dress showed that he had been hastily aroused from sleep. The bullet had been fired at him from the front, and had remained in his body after penetrating the heart.
His death had certainly been instantaneous and painless. There was no powder-marking either upon his dressing-gown or on his hands.
I would suggest that Mr. Cubitt's body may now be removed. I suppose, doctor, you have not recovered the bullet which wounded the lady?
A serious operation will be necessary before that can be done. But there are still four cartridges in the revolver.
"So it would seem," said Holmes. "Perhaps you can account also for the bullet which has so obviously struck the edge of the window?"
He had turned suddenly, and his long, thin finger was pointing to a hole which had been drilled right through the lower window-sash about an inch above the bottom.
"Wonderful!" said the country doctor. "You are certainly right, sir. Then a third shot has been fired, and therefore a third person must have been present.
"That is the problem which we are now about to solve," said Sherlock Holmes. "You remember, Inspector Martin, when the servants said that on leaving their room they were at once conscious of a smell of powder I remarked that the point was an extremely important one?"
It suggested that at the time of the firing the window as well as the door of the room had been open.
Otherwise the fumes of powder could not have been blown so rapidly through the house. A draught in the room was necessary for that.
Feeling sure that the window had been open at the time of the tragedy I conceived that there might have been a third person in the affair, who stood outside this opening and fired through it.
Any shot directed at this person might hit the sash. I looked, and there, sure enough, was the bullet mark!
It was a lady's hand-bag which stood upon the study table--a trim little hand-bag of crocodile-skin and silver.
Holmes opened it and turned the contents out. There were twenty fifty-pound notes of the Bank of England, held together by an india-rubber band--nothing else.
"This must be preserved, for it will figure in the trial," said Holmes, as he handed the bag with its contents to the inspector.
It is now necessary that we should try to throw some light upon this third bullet, which has clearly, from the splintering of the wood, been fired from inside the room.
I should like to see Mrs. King, the cook, again. You said, Mrs. King, that you were awakened by a LOUD explosion.
I believe that it was undoubtedly so. I rather think, Inspector Martin, that we have now exhausted all that this room can teach us.
A flower-bed extended up to the study window, and we all broke into an exclamation as we approached it.
The flowers were trampled down, and the soft soil was imprinted all over with footmarks. Large, masculine feet they were, with peculiarly long, sharp toes.
Holmes hunted about among the grass and leaves like a retriever after a wounded bird. Then, with a cry of satisfaction, he bent forward and picked up a little brazen cylinder.
"I thought so," said he; "the revolver had an ejector, and here is the third cartridge. I really think, Inspector Martin, that our case is almost complete."
The country inspector's face had shown his intense amazement at the rapid and masterful progress of Holmes's investigation.
At first he had shown some disposition to assert his own position; but now he was overcome with admiration and ready to follow without question wherever Holmes led.
I'll go into that later. There are several points in this problem which I have not been able to explain to you yet.
Now that I have got so far I had best proceed on my own lines, and then clear the whole matter up once and for all.
I have no desire to make mysteries, but it is impossible at the moment of action to enter into long and complex explanations.
I have the threads of this affair all in my hand. Even if this lady should never recover consciousness we can still reconstruct the events of last night and ensure that justice be done.
The servants were cross-questioned, but none of them had heard of such a place. The stable-boy threw a light upon the matter by remembering that a farmer of that name lived some miles off in the direction of East Ruston.
He took from his pocket the various slips of the dancing men. With these in front of him he worked for some time at the study-table.
Finally he handed a note to the boy, with directions to put it into the hands of the person to whom it was addressed, and especially to answer no questions of any sort which might be put to him.
I saw the outside of the note, addressed in straggling, irregular characters, very unlike Holmes's usual precise hand.
The boy who takes this note could no doubt forward your telegram. If there is an afternoon train to town, Watson, I think we should do well to take it, as I have a chemical analysis of some interest to finish, and this investigation draws rapidly to a close.
When the youth had been dispatched with the note, Sherlock Holmes gave his instructions to the servants.
If any visitor were to call asking for Mrs. Hilton Cubitt no information should be given as to her condition, but he was to be shown at once into the drawing-room.
I had so many letters now that I could proceed with considerable confidence to the second message, which worked out in this fashion:--
Inspector Martin and I had listened with the utmost interest to the full and clear account of how my friend had produced results which had led to so complete a command over our difficulties.
"It is a privilege to be associated with you in the handling of a case," said the inspector, warmly. "You will excuse me, however, if I speak frankly to you.
You are only answerable to yourself, but I have to answer to my superiors. If this Abe Slaney, living at Elrige's, is indeed the murderer, and if he has made his escape while I am seated here, I should certainly get into serious trouble.
But this is incredible, Mr. Holmes! Why should he come because you have asked him? Would not such a request rather rouse his suspicions and cause him to fly?
"I think I have known how to frame the letter," said Sherlock Holmes. "In fact, if I am not very much mistaken, here is the gentleman himself coming up the drive."
He swaggered up the path as if the place belonged to him, and we heard his loud, confident peal at the bell.
"I think, gentlemen," said Holmes, quietly, "that we had best take up our position behind the door. Every precaution is necessary when dealing with such a fellow.
We waited in silence for a minute--one of those minutes which one can never forget. Then the door opened and the man stepped in.
He glared from one to the other of us with a pair of blazing black eyes. Then he burst into a bitter laugh.
Well, gentlemen, you have the drop on me this time. I seem to have knocked up against something hard.
But I came here in answer to a letter from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt. Don't tell me that she is in this? Don't tell me that she helped to set a trap for me?
"You're crazy!" he cried, fiercely. "It was he that was hurt, not she. Who would have hurt little Elsie?
I may have threatened her, God forgive me, but I would not have touched a hair of her pretty head. Take it back--you!
He sank with a deep groan on to the settee and buried his face in his manacled hands. For five minutes he was silent.
"I have nothing to hide from you, gentlemen," said he. "If I shot the man he had his shot at me, and there's no murder in that.
But if you think I could have hurt that woman, then you don't know either me or her. I tell you there was never a man in this world loved a woman more than I loved her.
I had a right to her. She was pledged to me years ago. Who was this Englishman that he should come between us?
"She broke away from your influence when she found the man that you are," said Holmes, sternly. "She fled from America to avoid you, and she married an honourable gentleman in England.
You dogged her and followed her and made her life a misery to her in order to induce her to abandon the husband whom she loved and respected in order to fly with you, whom she feared and hated.
You have ended by bringing about the death of a noble man and driving his wife to suicide. That is your record in this business, Mr. Abe Slaney, and you will answer for it to the law.
"If Elsie dies I care nothing what becomes of me," said the American. He opened one of his hands and looked at a note crumpled up in his palm.
"See here, mister," he cried, with a gleam of suspicion in his eyes, "you're not trying to scare me over this, are you?
If the lady is hurt as bad as you say, who was it that wrote this note?" He tossed it forwards on to the table.
You wrote it? There was no one on earth outside the Joint who knew the secret of the dancing men. How came you to write it?
"I ask nothing better," said the American. "I guess the very best case I can make for myself is the absolute naked truth."
"It is my duty to warn you that it will be used against you," cried the inspector, with the magnificent fair-play of the British criminal law.
Well, I have been here a month now. I lived in that farm, where I had a room down below, and could get in and out every night, and no one the wiser.
I tried all I could to coax Elsie away. I knew that she read the messages, for once she wrote an answer under one of them.
She said that she would come down when her husband was asleep at three in the morning, and speak with me through the end window, if I would go away afterwards and leave her in peace.
She came down and brought money with her, trying to bribe me to go. This made me mad, and I caught her arm and tried to pull her through the window.
At that moment in rushed the husband with his revolver in his hand. Elsie had sunk down upon the floor, and we were face to face.
I was heeled also, and I held up my gun to scare him off and let me get away. He fired and missed me.
I pulled off almost at the same instant, and down he dropped. I made away across the garden, and as I went I heard the window shut behind me.
That's God's truth, gentlemen, every word of it, and I heard no more about it until that lad came riding up with a note which made me walk in here, like a jay, and give myself into your hands.
A cab had driven up whilst the American had been talking. Two uniformed policemen sat inside. Inspector Martin rose and touched his prisoner on the shoulder.
No, she is not conscious. Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I only hope that if ever again I have an important case I shall have the good fortune to have you by my side.
We stood at the window and watched the cab drive away. As I turned back my eye caught the pellet of paper which the prisoner had tossed upon the table.
"If you use the code which I have explained," said Holmes, "you will find that it simply means 'Come here at once.'
I was convinced that it was an invitation which he would not refuse, since he could never imagine that it could come from anyone but the lady.
Of Mrs. Hilton Cubitt I only know that I have heard she recovered entirely, and that she still remains a widow, devoting her whole life to the care of the poor and to the administration of her husband's estate.
Many startling successes and a few unavoidable failures were the outcome of this long period of continuous work.
It is true that the circumstances did not admit of any striking illustration of those powers for which my friend was famous, but there were some points about the case which made it stand out in those long records of crime from which I gather the material for these little narratives.
On referring to my note-book for the year 1895 I find that it was upon Saturday, the 23rd of April, that we first heard of Miss Violet Smith.
My friend, who loved above all things precision and concentration of thought, resented anything which distracted his attention from the matter in hand.
With a resigned air and a somewhat weary smile, Holmes begged the beautiful intruder to take a seat and to inform us what it was that was troubling her.
"At least it cannot be your health," said he, as his keen eyes darted over her; "so ardent a bicyclist must be full of energy."
She glanced down in surprise at her own feet, and I observed the slight roughening of the side of the sole caused by the friction of the edge of the pedal.
My friend took the lady's ungloved hand and examined it with as close an attention and as little sentiment as a scientist would show to a specimen.
"You will excuse me, I am sure. It is my business," said he, as he dropped it. "I nearly fell into the error of supposing that you were typewriting.
Of course, it is obvious that it is music. You observe the spatulate finger-end, Watson, which is common to both professions?
There is a spirituality about the face, however"--he gently turned it towards the light--"which the typewriter does not generate.
A beautiful neighbourhood and full of the most interesting associations. You remember, Watson, that it was near there that we took Archie Stamford, the forger.
My father is dead, Mr. Holmes. He was James Smith, who conducted the orchestra at the old Imperial Theatre.
My mother and I were left without a relation in the world except one uncle, Ralph Smith, who went to Africa twenty-five years ago, and we have never had a word from him since.
When father died we were left very poor, but one day we were told that there was an advertisement in the TIMES inquiring for our whereabouts.
You can imagine how excited we were, for we thought that someone had left us a fortune. We went at once to the lawyer whose name was given in the paper.
There we met two gentlemen, Mr. Carruthers and Mr. Woodley, who were home on a visit from South Africa.
It seemed strange to us that Uncle Ralph, who took no notice of us when he was alive, should be so careful to look after us when he was dead; but Mr. Carruthers explained that the reason was that my uncle had just heard of the death of his brother, and so felt responsible for our fate.
Mr. Woodley seemed to me to be a most odious person. He was for ever making eyes at me--a coarse, puffy-faced, red-moustached young man, with his hair plastered down on each side of his forehead.
I thought that he was perfectly hateful--and I was sure that Cyril would not wish me to know such a person.
The horse and trap were to have come this week, but for some reason they were not delivered, and again I had to cycle to the station.
That was this morning. You can think that I looked out when I came to Charlington Heath, and there, sure enough, was the man, exactly as he had been the two weeks before.
He always kept so far from me that I could not clearly see his face, but it was certainly someone whom I did not know.
He was dressed in a dark suit with a cloth cap. The only thing about his face that I could clearly see was his dark beard.
To-day I was not alarmed, but I was filled with curiosity, and I determined to find out who he was and what he wanted.
I slowed down my machine, but he slowed down his. Then I stopped altogether, but he stopped also. Then I laid a trap for him.
There is a sharp turning of the road, and I pedalled very quickly round this, and then I stopped and waited.
I expected him to shoot round and pass me before he could stop. But he never appeared. Then I went back and looked round the corner.
I could see a mile of road, but he was not on it. To make it the more extraordinary, there was no side road at this point down which he could have gone.
Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "This case certainly presents some features of its own," said he.
So by the process of exclusion we arrive at the fact that he made his way towards Charlington Hall, which, as I understand, is situated in its own grounds on one side of the road.
Nothing, Mr. Holmes, save that I was so perplexed that I felt I should not be happy until I had seen you and had your advice.
Oh, it may be a mere fancy of mine; but it has seemed to me sometimes that my employer, Mr. Carruthers, takes a great deal of interest in me.
We are thrown rather together. I play his accompaniments in the evening. He has never said anything. He is a perfect gentleman.
Well, at least he is fairly well-to-do. But he goes into the City two or three times a week. He is deeply interested in South African gold shares.
You will let me know any fresh development, Miss Smith. I am very busy just now, but I will find time to make some inquiries into your case.
In the meantime take no step without letting me know. Good-bye, and I trust that we shall have nothing but good news from you.
"It is part of the settled order of Nature that such a girl should have followers," said Holmes, as he pulled at his meditative pipe, "but for choice not on bicycles in lonely country roads.
Some secretive lover, beyond all doubt. But there are curious and suggestive details about the case, Watson.
No, my dear fellow, YOU will go down. This may be some trifling intrigue, and I cannot break my other important research for the sake of it.
On Monday you will arrive early at Farnham; you will conceal yourself near Charlington Heath; you will observe these facts for yourself, and act as your own judgment advises.
Then, having inquired as to the occupants of the Hall, you will come back to me and report. And now, Watson, not another word of the matter until we have a few solid stepping-stones on which we may hope to get across to our solution.
We had ascertained from the lady that she went down upon the Monday by the train which leaves Waterloo at 9.50, so I started early and caught the 9.13.
The heath was covered with golden patches of flowering gorse, gleaming magnificently in the light of the bright spring sunshine.
Behind one of these clumps I took up my position, so as to command both the gateway of the Hall and a long stretch of the road upon either side.
It had been deserted when I left it, but now I saw a cyclist riding down it from the opposite direction to that in which I had come.
He was clad in a dark suit, and I saw that he had a black beard. On reaching the end of the Charlington grounds he sprang from his machine and led it through a gap in the hedge, disappearing from my view.
A quarter of an hour passed and then a second cyclist appeared. This time it was the young lady coming from the station.
I saw her look about her as she came to the Charlington hedge. An instant later the man emerged from his hiding-place, sprang upon his cycle, and followed her.
She looked back at him and slowed her pace. He slowed also. She stopped. He at once stopped too, keeping two hundred yards behind her.
Her next movement was as unexpected as it was spirited. She suddenly whisked her wheels round and dashed straight at him!
I remained in my hiding-place, and it was well that I did so, for presently the man reappeared cycling slowly back.
He turned in at the Hall gates and dismounted from his machine. For some few minutes I could see him standing among the trees.
His hands were raised and he seemed to be settling his necktie. Then he mounted his cycle and rode away from me down the drive towards the Hall.
I ran across the heath and peered through the trees. Far away I could catch glimpses of the old grey building with its bristling Tudor chimneys, but the drive ran through a dense shrubbery, and I saw no more of my man.
However, it seemed to me that I had done a fairly good morning's work, and I walked back in high spirits to Farnham.
The local house-agent could tell me nothing about Charlington Hall, and referred me to a well-known firm in Pall Mall.
There I halted on my way home, and met with courtesy from the representative. No, I could not have Charlington Hall for the summer.
I was just too late. It had been let about a month ago. Mr. Williamson was the name of the tenant. He was a respectable elderly gentleman.
The polite agent was afraid he could say no more, as the affairs of his clients were not matters which he could discuss.
On the contrary, his austere face was even more severe than usual as he commented upon the things that I had done and the things that I had not.
Your hiding-place, my dear Watson, was very faulty. You should have been behind the hedge; then you would have had a close view of this interesting person.
As it is you were some hundreds of yards away, and can tell me even less than Miss Smith. She thinks she does not know the man; I am convinced she does.
Why, otherwise, should he be so desperately anxious that she should not get so near him as to see his features?
You describe him as bending over the handle-bar. Concealment again, you see. You really have done remarkably badly.
Gone to the nearest public-house. That is the centre of country gossip. They would have told you every name, from the master to the scullery-maid.
Williamson! It conveys nothing to my mind. If he is an elderly man he is not this active cyclist who sprints away from that athletic young lady's pursuit.
What have we gained by your expedition? The knowledge that the girl's story is true. I never doubted it.
That there is a connection between the cyclist and the Hall. I never doubted that either. That the Hall is tenanted by Williamson.
Who's the better for that? Well, well, my dear sir, don't look so depressed. We can do little more until next Saturday, and in the meantime I may make one or two inquiries myself.
Next morning we had a note from Miss Smith, recounting shortly and accurately the very incidents which I had seen, but the pith of the letter lay in the postscript:--
I am sure that you will respect my confidence, Mr. Holmes, when I tell you that my place here has become difficult owing to the fact that my employer has proposed marriage to me.
I am convinced that his feelings are most deep and most honourable. At the same time my promise is, of course, given.
He took my refusal very seriously, but also very gently. You can understand, however, that the situation is a little strained.
"Our young friend seems to be getting into deep waters," said Holmes, thoughtfully, as he finished the letter.
The case certainly presents more features of interest and more possibility of development than I had originally thought.
I should be none the worse for a quiet, peaceful day in the country, and I am inclined to run down this afternoon and test one or two theories which I have formed.
"I get so little active exercise that it is always a treat," said he. "You are aware that I have some proficiency in the good old British sport of boxing.
Occasionally it is of service. To-day, for example, I should have come to very ignominious grief without it.
I found that country pub which I had already recommended to your notice, and there I made my discreet inquiries.
I was in the bar, and a garrulous landlord was giving me all that I wanted. Williamson is a white-bearded man, and he lives alone with a small staff of servants at the Hall.
There is some rumour that he is or has been a clergyman; but one or two incidents of his short residence at the Hall struck me as peculiarly unecclesiastical.
I have already made some inquiries at a clerical agency, and they tell me that there WAS a man of that name in orders whose career has been a singularly dark one.
We had got as far as this when who should walk in but the gentleman himself, who had been drinking his beer in the tap-room and had heard the whole conversation.
Who was I? What did I want? What did I mean by asking questions? He had a fine flow of language, and his adjectives were very vigorous.
He ended a string of abuse by a vicious back-hander which I failed to entirely avoid. The next few minutes were delicious.
It was a straight left against a slogging ruffian. I emerged as you see me. Mr. Woodley went home in a cart.
So ended my country trip, and it must be confessed that, however enjoyable, my day on the Surrey border has not been much more profitable than your own.
As to the special cause of my leaving, it is not merely the strained situation with Mr. Carruthers, but it is the reappearance of that odious man, Mr. Woodley.
He was always hideous, but he looks more awful than ever now, for he appears to have had an accident and he is much disfigured.
I saw him out of the window, but I am glad to say I did not meet him. He had a long talk with Mr. Carruthers, who seemed much excited afterwards.
Woodley must be staying in the neighbourhood, for he did not sleep here, and yet I caught a glimpse of him again this morning slinking about in the shrubbery.
I would sooner have a savage wild animal loose about the place. I loathe and fear him more than I can say.
How CAN Mr. Carruthers endure such a creature for a moment? However, all my troubles will be over on Saturday.
"So I trust, Watson; so I trust," said Holmes, gravely. "There is some deep intrigue going on round that little woman, and it is our duty to see that no one molests her upon that last journey.
I think, Watson, that we must spare time to run down together on Saturday morning, and make sure that this curious and inconclusive investigation has no untoward ending.
I confess that I had not up to now taken a very serious view of the case, which had seemed to me rather grotesque and bizarre than dangerous.
The ruffian Woodley was a very different person, but, except on one occasion, he had not molested our client, and now he visited the house of Carruthers without intruding upon her presence.
The man on the bicycle was doubtless a member of those week-end parties at the Hall of which the publican had spoken; but who he was or what he wanted was as obscure as ever.
It was the severity of Holmes's manner and the fact that he slipped a revolver into his pocket before leaving our rooms which impressed me with the feeling that tragedy might prove to lurk behind this curious train of events.
Holmes and I walked along the broad, sandy road inhaling the fresh morning air, and rejoicing in the music of the birds and the fresh breath of the spring.
Holmes pointed down the long tract of road which wound, a reddish yellow band, between the brown of the heath and the budding green of the woods.
Far away, a black dot, we could see a vehicle moving in our direction. Holmes gave an exclamation of impatience.
"I had given a margin of half an hour," said he. "If that is her trap she must be making for the earlier train.
From the instant that we passed the rise we could no longer see the vehicle, but we hastened onwards at such a pace that my sedentary life began to tell upon me, and I was compelled to fall behind.
Holmes, however, was always in training, for he had inexhaustible stores of nervous energy upon which to draw.
His springy step never slowed until suddenly, when he was a hundred yards in front of me, he halted, and I saw him throw up his hand with a gesture of grief and despair.
At the same instant an empty dog-cart, the horse cantering, the reins trailing, appeared round the curve of the road and rattled swiftly towards us.
"Too late, Watson; too late!" cried Holmes, as I ran panting to his side. "Fool that I was not to allow for that earlier train!
It's abduction, Watson--abduction! Murder! Heaven knows what! Block the road! Stop the horse! That's right.
We had sprung into the dog-cart, and Holmes, after turning the horse, gave it a sharp cut with the whip, and we flew back along the road.
As we turned the curve the whole stretch of road between the Hall and the heath was opened up. I grasped Holmes's arm.
A solitary cyclist was coming towards us. His head was down and his shoulders rounded as he put every ounce of energy that he possessed on to the pedals.
He was flying like a racer. Suddenly he raised his bearded face, saw us close to him, and pulled up, springing from his machine.
That coal-black beard was in singular contrast to the pallor of his face, and his eyes were as bright as if he had a fever.
"Halloa! Stop there!" he shouted, holding his bicycle to block our road. "Where did you get that dog-cart?
Pull up, man!" he yelled, drawing a pistol from his side pocket. "Pull up, I say, or, by George, I'll put a bullet into your horse."
"Good Lord! Good Lord! what shall I do?" cried the stranger, in an ecstasy of despair. "They've got her, that hellhound Woodley and the blackguard parson.
Come, man, come, if you really are her friend. Stand by me and we'll save her, if I have to leave my carcass in Charlington Wood.
He ran distractedly, his pistol in his hand, towards a gap in the hedge. Holmes followed him, and I, leaving the horse grazing beside the road, followed Holmes.
"This is where they came through," said he, pointing to the marks of several feet upon the muddy path.
It was a young fellow about seventeen, dressed like an ostler, with leather cords and gaiters. He lay upon his back, his knees drawn up, a terrible cut upon his head.
"That's Peter, the groom," cried the stranger. "He drove her. The beasts have pulled him off and clubbed him.
Let him lie; we can't do him any good, but we may save her from the worst fate that can befall a woman.
We ran frantically down the path, which wound among the trees. We had reached the shrubbery which surrounded the house when Holmes pulled up.
They didn't go to the house. Here are their marks on the left--here, beside the laurel bushes! Ah, I said so!
As he spoke a woman's shrill scream--a scream which vibrated with a frenzy of horror--burst from the thick green clump of bushes in front of us.
"This way! This way! They are in the bowling alley," cried the stranger, darting through the bushes. "Ah, the cowardly dogs!
We had broken suddenly into a lovely glade of greensward surrounded by ancient trees. On the farther side of it, under the shadow of a mighty oak, there stood a singular group of three people.
Between them an elderly, grey-bearded man, wearing a short surplice over a light tweed suit, had evidently just completed the wedding service, for he pocketed his prayer-book as we appeared and slapped the sinister bridegroom upon the back in jovial congratulation.
"Come on!" cried our guide; "come on!" He rushed across the glade, Holmes and I at his heels. As we approached, the lady staggered against the trunk of the tree for support.
Williamson, the ex-clergyman, bowed to us with mock politeness, and the bully Woodley advanced with a shout of brutal and exultant laughter.
"You can take your beard off, Bob," said he. "I know you right enough. Well, you and your pals have just come in time for me to be able to introduce you to Mrs.
Our guide's answer was a singular one. He snatched off the dark beard which had disguised him and threw it on the ground, disclosing a long, sallow, clean-shaven face below it.
Then he raised his revolver and covered the young ruffian, who was advancing upon him with his dangerous riding-crop swinging in his hand.
"Yes," said our ally, "I AM Bob Carruthers, and I'll see this woman righted if I have to swing for it.
The old man, still clad in his surplice, burst into such a string of foul oaths as I have never heard, and pulled out a revolver of his own, but before he could raise it he was looking down the barrel of Holmes's weapon.
"Enough of this," said my friend, coldly. "Drop that pistol! Watson, pick it up! Hold it to his head!
"You have heard of me, I see. I will represent the official police until their arrival. Here, you!" he shouted to a frightened groom who had appeared at the edge of the glade.
"Come here. Take this note as hard as you can ride to Farnham." He scribbled a few words upon a leaf from his note-book.
Give it to the superintendent at the police-station. Until he comes I must detain you all under my personal custody.
The strong, masterful personality of Holmes dominated the tragic scene, and all were equally puppets in his hands.
Williamson and Carruthers found themselves carrying the wounded Woodley into the house, and I gave my arm to the frightened girl.
The injured man was laid on his bed, and at Holmes's request I examined him. I carried my report to where he sat in the old tapestry-hung dining-room with his two prisoners before him.
"What!" cried Carruthers, springing out of his chair. "I'll go upstairs and finish him first. Do you tell me that that girl, that angel, is to be tied to Roaring Jack Woodley for life?"
"You need not concern yourself about that," said Holmes. "There are two very good reasons why she should under no circumstances be his wife.
Then you got it by a trick. But in any case a forced marriage is no marriage, but it is a very serious felony, as you will discover before you have finished.
You'll have time to think the point out during the next ten years or so, unless I am mistaken. As to you, Carruthers, you would have done better to keep your pistol in your pocket.
I kept my distance from her, and I wore a beard so that she should not recognise me, for she is a good and high-spirited girl, and she wouldn't have stayed in my employment long if she had thought that I was following her about the country roads.
Because then, again, she would have left me, and I couldn't bear to face that. Even if she couldn't love me it was a great deal to me just to see her dainty form about the house, and to hear the sound of her voice.
Maybe the two things go together. Anyhow, I couldn't let her go. Besides, with this crowd about, it was well that she should have someone near to look after her.
"Hum!" said Holmes. "I think I see how things worked, and I can understand how this message would, as you say, bring them to a head.
"By Heaven," said he, "if you squeal on us, Bob Carruthers, I'll serve you as you served Jack Woodley.
You can bleat about the girl to your heart's content, for that's your own affair, but if you round on your pals to this plain-clothes copper it will be the worst day's work that ever you did.
"Your reverence need not be excited," said Holmes, lighting a cigarette. "The case is clear enough against you, and all I ask is a few details for my private curiosity.
However, if there's any difficulty in your telling me I'll do the talking, and then you will see how far you have a chance of holding back your secrets.
In the first place, three of you came from South Africa on this game--you Williamson, you Carruthers, and Woodley.
"Lie number one," said the old man; "I never saw either of them until two months ago, and I have never been in Africa in my life, so you can put that in your pipe and smoke it, Mr. Busybody Holmes!"
Well, well, two of you came over. His reverence is our own home-made article. You had known Ralph Smith in South Africa.
You had reason to believe he would not live long. You found out that his niece would inherit his fortune.
So you came over, the two of you, and hunted up the girl. The idea was that one of you was to marry her and the other have a share of the plunder.
I see. You got the young lady into your service, and there Woodley was to do the courting. She recognised the drunken brute that he was, and would have nothing to do with him.
Meanwhile, your arrangement was rather upset by the fact that you had yourself fallen in love with the lady.
There was a quarrel between you. He left you in a rage, and began to make his own plans independently of you.
"It strikes me, Williamson, there isn't very much that we can tell this gentleman," cried Carruthers, with a bitter laugh.
Yes, we quarreled, and he knocked me down. I am level with him on that, anyhow. Then I lost sight of him.
That was when he picked up with this cast padre here. I found that they had set up house-keeping together at this place on the line that she had to pass for the station.
I kept my eye on her after that, for I knew there was some devilry in the wind. I saw them from time to time, for I was anxious to know what they were after.
Two days ago Woodley came up to my house with this cable, which showed that Ralph Smith was dead. He asked me if I would stand by the bargain.
I said I would not. He asked me if I would marry the girl myself and give him a share. I said I would willingly do so, but that she would not have me.
He said, 'Let us get her married first, and after a week or two she may see things a bit different.' I said I would have nothing to do with violence.
So he went off cursing, like the foul-mouthed blackguard that he was, and swearing that he would have her yet.
She was leaving me this week-end, and I had got a trap to take her to the station, but I was so uneasy in my mind that I followed her on my bicycle.
She had got a start, however, and before I could catch her the mischief was done. The first thing I knew about it was when I saw you two gentlemen driving back in her dog-cart.
Holmes rose and tossed the end of his cigarette into the grate. "I have been very obtuse, Watson," said he.
When in your report you said that you had seen the cyclist as you thought arrange his necktie in the shrubbery, that alone should have told me all.
I think, Watson, that in your medical capacity you might wait upon Miss Smith and tell her that if she is sufficiently recovered we shall be happy to escort her to her mother's home.
If she is not quite convalescent you will find that a hint that we were about to telegraph to a young electrician in the Midlands would probably complete the cure.
As to you, Mr. Carruthers, I think that you have done what you could to make amends for your share in an evil plot.
There is my card, sir, and if my evidence can be of help to you in your trial it shall be at your disposal.
Each case has been the prelude to another, and the crisis once over the actors have passed for ever out of our busy lives.
Williamson and Woodley were both tried for abduction and assault, the former getting seven years and the latter ten.
Of the fate of Carruthers I have no record, but I am sure that his assault was not viewed very gravely by the Court, since Woodley had the reputation of being a most dangerous ruffian, and I think that a few months were sufficient to satisfy the demands of justice.
And yet his first action when the door had closed behind him was to stagger against the table, whence he slipped down upon the floor, and there was that majestic figure prostrate and insensible upon our bearskin hearthrug.
We had sprung to our feet, and for a few moments we stared in silent amazement at this ponderous piece of wreckage, which told of some sudden and fatal storm far out on the ocean of life.
Collar and shirt bore the grime of a long journey, and the hair bristled unkempt from the well-shaped head.
"Absolute exhaustion--possibly mere hunger and fatigue," said I, with my finger on the thready pulse, where the stream of life trickled thin and small.
"Return ticket from Mackleton, in the North of England," said Holmes, drawing it from the watch-pocket.
The puckered eyelids had begun to quiver, and now a pair of vacant, grey eyes looked up at us. An instant later the man had scrambled on to his feet, his face crimson with shame.
Forgive this weakness, Mr. Holmes; I have been a little overwrought. Thank you, if I might have a glass of milk and a biscuit I have no doubt that I should be better.
I came personally, Mr. Holmes, in order to ensure that you would return with me. I feared that no telegram would convince you of the absolute urgency of the case.
I am quite well again. I cannot imagine how I came to be so weak. I wish you, Mr. Holmes, to come to Mackleton with me by the next train.
My colleague, Dr. Watson, could tell you that we are very busy at present. I am retained in this case of the Ferrers Documents, and the Abergavenny murder is coming up for trial.
"Important!" Our visitor threw up his hands. "Have you heard nothing of the abduction of the only son of the Duke of Holdernesse?"
Exactly. We had tried to keep it out of the papers, but there was some rumour in the GLOBE last night.
'Holdernesse, 6th Duke, K.G., P.C.' --half the alphabet! 'Baron Beverley, Earl of Carston'--dear me, what a list!
'Lord Lieutenant of Hallamshire since 1900. Married Edith, daughter of Sir Charles Appledore, 1888. Heir and only child, Lord Saltire.
Owns about two hundred and fifty thousand acres. Minerals in Lancashire and Wales. Address: Carlton House Terrace; Holdernesse Hall, Hallamshire; Carston Castle, Bangor, Wales.
Lord of the Admiralty, 1872; Chief Secretary of State for--' Well, well, this man is certainly one of the greatest subjects of the Crown!
The greatest and perhaps the wealthiest. I am aware, Mr. Holmes, that you take a very high line in professional matters, and that you are prepared to work for the work's sake.
I may tell you, however, that his Grace has already intimated that a cheque for five thousand pounds will be handed over to the person who can tell him where his son is, and another thousand to him who can name the man, or men, who have taken him.
"It is a princely offer," said Holmes. "Watson, I think that we shall accompany Dr. Huxtable back to the North of England.
And now, Dr. Huxtable, when you have consumed that milk you will kindly tell me what has happened, when it happened, how it happened, and, finally, what Dr. Thorneycroft Huxtable, of the Priory School, near Mackleton, has to do with the matter, and why he comes three days after an event--the state of your chin gives the date--to ask for my humble services.
Our visitor had consumed his milk and biscuits. The light had come back to his eyes and the colour to his cheeks as he set himself with great vigour and lucidity to explain the situation.
He had been with me for two years, and came with the best references; but he was a silent, morose man, not very popular either with masters or boys.
No trace could be found of the fugitives, and now on Thursday morning we are as ignorant as we were on Tuesday.
The Duke is greatly agitated--and as to me, you have seen yourselves the state of nervous prostration to which the suspense and the responsibility have reduced me.
Mr. Holmes, if ever you put forward your full powers, I implore you to do so now, for never in your life could you have a case which is more worthy of them.
Sherlock Holmes had listened with the utmost intentness to the statement of the unhappy schoolmaster.
"You have been very remiss in not coming to me sooner," said he, severely. "You start me on my investigation with a very serious handicap.
It is inconceivable, for example, that this ivy and this lawn would have yielded nothing to an expert observer.
I am not to blame, Mr. Holmes. His Grace was extremely desirous to avoid all public scandal. He was afraid of his family unhappiness being dragged before the world.
Yes, sir, and it has proved most disappointing. An apparent clue was at once obtained, since a boy and a young man were reported to have been seen leaving a neighbouring station by an early train.
Only last night we had news that the couple had been hunted down in Liverpool, and they prove to have no connection whatever with the matter in hand.
Then it was that in my despair and disappointment, after a sleepless night, I came straight to you by the early train.
And yet the problem should be capable of ultimate solution. I shall be very happy to look into it. Have you been able to trace any connection between the missing boy and this German master?
Well, now, you do not mean to seriously suggest that this German rode off upon a bicycle in the dead of the night bearing the boy in his arms?
Of course he would. The blind theory won't do. But the incident is an admirable starting-point for an investigation.
After all, a bicycle is not an easy thing to conceal or to destroy. One other question. Did anyone call to see the boy on the day before he disappeared?
The coat of arms was on the envelope, and it was addressed in the Duke's peculiar stiff hand. Besides, the Duke remembers having written.
You see the point of my questions, of course. Either the boy was carried off by force or he went of his own free will.
In the latter case you would expect that some prompting from outside would be needed to make so young a lad do such a thing.
If he has had no visitors, that prompting must have come in letters. Hence I try to find out who were his correspondents.
Who wrote to him on the very day of his disappearance. Were the relations between father and son very friendly?
His Grace is never very friendly with anyone. He is completely immersed in large public questions, and is rather inaccessible to all ordinary emotions.
I have had some confidential talks with Mr. James Wilder, his Grace's secretary. It was he who gave me the information about Lord Saltire's feelings.
In the meantime I will do a little quiet work at your own doors, and perhaps the scent is not so cold but that two old hounds like Watson and myself may get a sniff of it.
That evening found us in the cold, bracing atmosphere of the Peak country, in which Dr. Huxtable's famous school is situated.
It was already dark when we reached it. A card was lying on the hall table, and the butler whispered something to his master, who turned to us with agitation in every heavy feature.
"The Duke is here," said he. "The Duke and Mr. Wilder are in the study. Come, gentlemen, and I will introduce you."
I was, of course, familiar with the pictures of the famous statesman, but the man himself was very different from his representation.
He was a tall and stately person, scrupulously dressed, with a drawn, thin face, and a nose which was grotesquely curved and long.
Such was the stately presence who looked stonily at us from the centre of Dr. Huxtable's hearthrug. Beside him stood a very young man, whom I understood to be Wilder, the private secretary.
He was small, nervous, alert, with intelligent, light-blue eyes and mobile features. It was he who at once, in an incisive and positive tone, opened the conversation.
I called this morning, Dr. Huxtable, too late to prevent you from starting for London. I learned that your object was to invite Mr. Sherlock Holmes to undertake the conduct of this case.
You are well aware, Dr. Huxtable, that his Grace is particularly anxious to avoid all public scandal.
"The matter can be easily remedied," said the brow-beaten doctor; "Mr. Sherlock Holmes can return to London by the morning train."
I could see that the unfortunate doctor was in the last stage of indecision, from which he was rescued by the deep, sonorous voice of the red-bearded Duke, which boomed out like a dinner-gong.
Far from going to the inn, Mr. Holmes, I should be pleased if you would come and stay with me at Holdernesse Hall.
I thank your Grace. For the purposes of my investigation I think that it would be wiser for me to remain at the scene of the mystery.
Just as you like, Mr. Holmes. Any information which Mr. Wilder or I can give you is, of course, at your disposal.
"It will probably be necessary for me to see you at the Hall," said Holmes. "I would only ask you now, sir, whether you have formed any explanation in your own mind as to the mysterious disappearance of your son?"
Excuse me if I allude to that which is painful to you, but I have no alternative. Do you think that the Duchess had anything to do with the matter?
The other most obvious explanation is that the child has been kidnapped for the purpose of levying ransom.
One more question, your Grace. I understand that you wrote to your son upon the day when this incident occurred.
Was there anything in your letter which might have unbalanced him or induced him to take such a step?
"His Grace is not in the habit of posting letters himself," said he. "This letter was laid with others upon the study table, and I myself put them in the post-bag."
"For my own part," the Duke continued, "I have advised the police to turn their attention to the South of France.
I could see that there were other questions which Holmes would have wished to put; but the nobleman's abrupt manner showed that the interview was at an end.
It was evident that to his intensely aristocratic nature this discussion of his intimate family affairs with a stranger was most abhorrent, and that he feared lest every fresh question would throw a fiercer light into the discreetly shadowed corners of his ducal history.
When the nobleman and his secretary had left, my friend flung himself at once with characteristic eagerness into the investigation.
The boy's chamber was carefully examined, and yielded nothing save the absolute conviction that it was only through the window that he could have escaped.
That one dint in the short green grass was the only material witness left of this inexplicable nocturnal flight.
Sherlock Holmes left the house alone, and only returned after eleven. He had obtained a large ordnance map of the neighbourhood, and this he brought into my room, where he laid it out on the bed, and, having balanced the lamp in the middle of it, he began to smoke over it, and occasionally to point out objects of interest with the reeking amber of his pipe.
Look at this map. This dark square is the Priory School. I'll put a pin in it. Now, this line is the main road.
You see that it runs east and west past the school, and you see also that there is no side road for a mile either way.
By a singular and happy chance we are able to some extent to check what passed along this road during the night in question.
At this point, where my pipe is now resting, a country constable was on duty from twelve to six. It is, as you perceive, the first cross road on the east side.
This man declares that he was not absent from his post for an instant, and he is positive that neither boy nor man could have gone that way unseen.
I have spoken with this policeman to-night, and he appears to me to be a perfectly reliable person. That blocks this end.
The people at the inn were alert all night, awaiting his coming, and one or other of them seems to have continually had an eye upon the road.
They declare that no one passed. If their evidence is good, then we are fortunate enough to be able to block the west, and also to be able to say that the fugitives did NOT use the road at all.
That is certain. Let us weigh the one against the other. On the south of the house is, as you perceive, a large district of arable land, cut up into small fields, with stone walls between them.
There, I admit that a bicycle is impossible. We can dismiss the idea. We turn to the country on the north.
Here there lies a grove of trees, marked as the 'Ragged Shaw,' and on the farther side stretches a great rolling moor, Lower Gill Moor, extending for ten miles and sloping gradually upwards.
Here, at one side of this wilderness, is Holdernesse Hall, ten miles by road, but only six across the moor.
It is a peculiarly desolate plain. A few moor farmers have small holdings, where they rear sheep and cattle.
Except these, the plover and the curlew are the only inhabitants until you come to the Chesterfield high road.
There is a church there, you see, a few cottages, and an inn. Beyond that the hills become precipitous.
"Well, well!" said Holmes, impatiently. "A good cyclist does not need a high road. The moor is intersected with paths and the moon was at the full.
There was an agitated knock at the door, and an instant afterwards Dr. Huxtable was in the room. In his hand he held a blue cricket-cap, with a white chevron on the peak.
"At last we have a clue!" he cried. "Thank Heaven! at last we are on the dear boy's track! It is his cap."
In the van of the gipsies who camped on the moor. They left on Tuesday. To-day the police traced them down and examined their caravan.
They shuffled and lied--said that they found it on the moor on Tuesday morning. They know where he is, the rascals!
Thank goodness, they are all safe under lock and key. Either the fear of the law or the Duke's purse will certainly get out of them all that they know.
"So far, so good," said Holmes, when the doctor had at last left the room. "It at least bears out the theory that it is on the side of the Lower Gill Moor that we must hope for results.
The police have really done nothing locally, save the arrest of these gipsies. Look here, Watson! There is a watercourse across the moor.
You see it marked here in the map. In some parts it widens into a morass. This is particularly so in the region between Holdernesse Hall and the school.
It is vain to look elsewhere for tracks in this dry weather; but at THAT point there is certainly a chance of some record being left.
I will call you early to-morrow morning, and you and I will try if we can throw some little light upon the mystery.
The day was just breaking when I woke to find the long, thin form of Holmes by my bedside. He was fully dressed, and had apparently already been out.
"I have done the lawn and the bicycle shed," said he. "I have also had a ramble through the Ragged Shaw.
Now, Watson, there is cocoa ready in the next room. I must beg you to hurry, for we have a great day before us.
His eyes shone, and his cheek was flushed with the exhilaration of the master workman who sees his work lie ready before him.
A very different Holmes, this active, alert man, from the introspective and pallid dreamer of Baker Street.
I felt, as I looked upon that supple figure, alive with nervous energy, that it was indeed a strenuous day that awaited us.
Certainly, if the lad had gone homewards, he must have passed this, and he could not pass it without leaving his traces.
But no sign of him or the German could be seen. With a darkening face my friend strode along the margin, eagerly observant of every muddy stain upon the mossy surface.
Sheep-marks there were in profusion, and at one place, some miles down, cows had left their tracks. Nothing more.
"Check number one," said Holmes, looking gloomily over the rolling expanse of the moor. "There is another morass down yonder and a narrow neck between.
We had come on a small black ribbon of pathway. In the middle of it, clearly marked on the sodden soil, was the track of a bicycle.
"A bicycle, certainly, but not THE bicycle," said he. "I am familiar with forty-two different impressions left by tyres.
This, as you perceive, is a Dunlop, with a patch upon the outer cover. Heidegger's tyres were Palmer's, leaving longitudinal stripes.
Possibly, if we could prove a bicycle to have been in his possession. But this we have utterly failed to do.
No, no, my dear Watson. The more deeply sunk impression is, of course, the hind wheel, upon which the weight rests.
You perceive several places where it has passed across and obliterated the more shallow mark of the front one.
It was undoubtedly heading away from the school. It may or may not be connected with our inquiry, but we will follow it backwards before we go any farther.
We did so, and at the end of a few hundred yards lost the tracks as we emerged from the boggy portion of the moor.
Following the path backwards, we picked out another spot, where a spring trickled across it. Here, once again, was the mark of the bicycle, though nearly obliterated by the hoofs of cows.
After that there was no sign, but the path ran right on into Ragged Shaw, the wood which backed on to the school.
From this wood the cycle must have emerged. Holmes sat down on a boulder and rested his chin in his hands.
"Well, well," said he, at last. "It is, of course, possible that a cunning man might change the tyre of his bicycle in order to leave unfamiliar tracks.
A criminal who was capable of such a thought is a man whom I should be proud to do business with. We will leave this question undecided and hark back to our morass again, for we have left a good deal unexplored.
We continued our systematic survey of the edge of the sodden portion of the moor, and soon our perseverance was gloriously rewarded.
Right across the lower part of the bog lay a miry path. Holmes gave a cry of delight as he approached it.
An impression like a fine bundle of telegraph wires ran down the centre of it. It was the Palmer tyre.
"Here is Herr Heidegger, sure enough!" cried Holmes, exultantly. "My reasoning seems to have been pretty sound, Watson."
But we have a long way still to go. Kindly walk clear of the path. Now let us follow the trail. I fear that it will not lead very far.
We found, however, as we advanced that this portion of the moor is intersected with soft patches, and, though we frequently lost sight of the track, we always succeeded in picking it up once more.
"Do you observe," said Holmes, "that the rider is now undoubtedly forcing the pace? There can be no doubt of it.
There was a broad, irregular smudge covering some yards of the track. Then there were a few footmarks, and the tyre reappeared once more.
Holmes held up a crumpled branch of flowering gorse. To my horror I perceived that the yellow blossoms were all dabbled with crimson.
"Bad!" said Holmes. "Bad! Stand clear, Watson! Not an unnecessary footstep! What do I read here? He fell wounded, he stood up, he remounted, he proceeded.
But there is no other track. Cattle on this side path. He was surely not gored by a bull? Impossible!
But I see no traces of anyone else. We must push on, Watson. Surely with stains as well as the track to guide us he cannot escape us now.
Our search was not a very long one. The tracks of the tyre began to curve fantastically upon the wet and shining path.
On the other side of the bushes a shoe was projecting. We ran round, and there lay the unfortunate rider.
He was a tall man, full bearded, with spectacles, one glass of which had been knocked out. The cause of his death was a frightful blow upon the head, which had crushed in part of his skull.
That he could have gone on after receiving such an injury said much for the vitality and courage of the man.
He wore shoes, but no socks, and his open coat disclosed a night-shirt beneath it. It was undoubtedly the German master.
Holmes turned the body over reverently, and examined it with great attention. He then sat in deep thought for a time, and I could see by his ruffled brow that this grim discovery had not, in his opinion, advanced us much in our inquiry.
On the other hand, we are bound to inform the police of the discovery, and to see that this poor fellow's body is looked after.
But I need your company and assistance. Wait a bit! There is a fellow cutting peat up yonder. Bring him over here, and he will guide the police.
"Now, Watson," said he, "we have picked up two clues this morning. One is the bicycle with the Palmer tyre, and we see what that has led to.
The other is the bicycle with the patched Dunlop. Before we start to investigate that, let us try to realize what we DO know so as to make the most of it, and to separate the essential from the accidental.
First of all I wish to impress upon you that the boy certainly left of his own free will. He got down from his window and he went off, either alone or with someone.
Well, now, let us turn to this unfortunate German master. The boy was fully dressed when he fled. Therefore, he foresaw what he would do.
Why did he go? Because, from his bedroom window, he saw the flight of the boy. Because he wished to overtake him and bring him back.
Now I come to the critical part of my argument. The natural action of a man in pursuing a little boy would be to run after him.
He would know that he could overtake him. But the German does not do so. He turns to his bicycle. I am told that he was an excellent cyclist.
The lad, then, HAD a companion in his flight. And the flight was a swift one, since it took five miles before an expert cyclist could overtake them.
Yet we survey the ground round the scene of the tragedy. What do we find? A few cattle tracks, nothing more.
I took a wide sweep round, and there is no path within fifty yards. Another cyclist could have had nothing to do with the actual murder.
"Admirable!" he said. "A most illuminating remark. It IS impossible as I state it, and therefore I must in some respect have stated it wrong.
Tut, tut; we have solved some worse problems. At least we have plenty of material, if we can only use it.
Come, then, and, having exhausted the Palmer, let us see what the Dunlop with the patched cover has to offer us.
We picked up the track and followed it onwards for some distance; but soon the moor rose into a long, heather-tufted curve, and we left the watercourse behind us.
No further help from tracks could be hoped for. At the spot where we saw the last of the Dunlop tyre it might equally have led to Holdernesse Hall, the stately towers of which rose some miles to our left, or to a low, grey village which lay in front of us, and marked the position of the Chesterfield high road.
As we approached the forbidding and squalid inn, with the sign of a game-cock above the door, Holmes gave a sudden groan and clutched me by the shoulder to save himself from falling.
He had had one of those violent strains of the ankle which leave a man helpless. With difficulty he limped up to the door, where a squat, dark, elderly man was smoking a black clay pipe.
"Who are you, and how do you get my name so pat?" the countryman answered, with a suspicious flash of a pair of cunning eyes.
Well, it's printed on the board above your head. It's easy to see a man who is master of his own house.
"Look here, my man," said he. "This is really rather an awkward fix for me. I don't mind how I get on."
"Pals of the Dook, I suppose?" said the landlord, surveying our mud-stained garments with ironical eyes.
"I've less reason to wish the Dook well than most men," said he, "for I was his head coachman once, and cruel bad he treated me.
It was him that sacked me without a character on the word of a lying corn-chandler. But I'm glad to hear that the young lord was heard of in Liverpool, and I'll help you to take the news to the Hall.
When we were left alone in the stone-flagged kitchen it was astonishing how rapidly that sprained ankle recovered.
It was nearly nightfall, and we had eaten nothing since early morning, so that we spent some time over our meal.
Holmes was lost in thought, and once or twice he walked over to the window and stared earnestly out. It opened on to a squalid courtyard.
In the far corner was a smithy, where a grimy lad was at work. On the other side were the stables. Holmes had sat down again after one of these excursions, when he suddenly sprang out of his chair with a loud exclamation.
"By Heaven, Watson, I believe that I've got it!" he cried. "Yes, yes, it must be so. Watson, do you remember seeing any cow-tracks to-day?"
Well, everywhere. They were at the morass, and again on the path, and again near where poor Heidegger met his death.
Strange, Watson, that we should see tracks all along our line, but never a cow on the whole moor; very strange, Watson, eh?
But I can. I could swear to it. However, we will go back at our leisure and verify it. What a blind beetle I have been not to draw my conclusion!
Only that it is a remarkable cow which walks, canters, and gallops. By George, Watson, it was no brain of a country publican that thought out such a blind as that!
The coast seems to be clear, save for that lad in the smithy. Let us slip out and see what we can see.
There were two rough-haired, unkempt horses in the tumble-down stable. Holmes raised the hind leg of one of them and laughed aloud.
Old shoes, but newly shod--old shoes, but new nails. This case deserves to be a classic. Let us go across to the smithy.
The lad continued his work without regarding us. I saw Holmes's eye darting to right and left among the litter of iron and wood which was scattered about the floor.
Suddenly, however, we heard a step behind us, and there was the landlord, his heavy eyebrows drawn over his savage eyes, his swarthy features convulsed with passion.
He held a short, metal-headed stick in his hand, and he advanced in so menacing a fashion that I was right glad to feel the revolver in my pocket.
"Why, Mr. Reuben Hayes," said Holmes, coolly, "one might think that you were afraid of our finding something out."
The man mastered himself with a violent effort, and his grim mouth loosened into a false laugh, which was more menacing than his frown.
"You're welcome to all you can find out in my smithy," said he. "But look here, mister, I don't care for folk poking about my place without my leave, so the sooner you pay your score and get out of this the better I shall be pleased."
"All right, Mr. Hayes--no harm meant," said Holmes. "We have been having a look at your horses, but I think I'll walk after all.
"Not more than two miles to the Hall gates. That's the road to the left." He watched us with sullen eyes until we had left his premises.
We did not go very far along the road, for Holmes stopped the instant that the curve hid us from the landlord's view.
"We were warm, as the children say, at that inn," said he. "I seem to grow colder every step that I take away from it.
"I am convinced," said I, "that this Reuben Hayes knows all about it. A more self-evident villain I never saw."
Oh! he impressed you in that way, did he? There are the horses, there is the smithy. Yes, it is an interesting place, this Fighting Cock.
A long, sloping hillside, dotted with grey limestone boulders, stretched behind us. We had turned off the road, and were making our way up the hill, when, looking in the direction of Holdernesse Hall, I saw a cyclist coming swiftly along.
"Get down, Watson!" cried Holmes, with a heavy hand upon my shoulder. We had hardly sunk from view when the man flew past us on the road.
Amid a rolling cloud of dust I caught a glimpse of a pale, agitated face--a face with horror in every lineament, the mouth open, the eyes staring wildly in front.
We scrambled from rock to rock until in a few moments we had made our way to a point from which we could see the front door of the inn.
Wilder's bicycle was leaning against the wall beside it. No one was moving about the house, nor could we catch a glimpse of any faces at the windows.
Slowly the twilight crept down as the sun sank behind the high towers of Holdernesse Hall. Then in the gloom we saw the two side-lamps of a trap light up in the stable yard of the inn, and shortly afterwards heard the rattle of hoofs, as it wheeled out into the road and tore off at a furious pace in the direction of Chesterfield.
A single man in a dog-cart, so far as I could see. Well, it certainly was not Mr. James Wilder, for there he is at the door.
A red square of light had sprung out of the darkness. In the middle of it was the black figure of the secretary, his head advanced, peering out into the night.
It was evident that he was expecting someone. Then at last there were steps in the road, a second figure was visible for an instant against the light, the door shut, and all was black once more.
Quite so. These are what one may call the private guests. Now, what in the world is Mr. James Wilder doing in that den at this hour of night, and who is the companion who comes to meet him there?
Together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door of the inn. The bicycle still leaned against the wall.
Holmes struck a match and held it to the back wheel, and I heard him chuckle as the light fell upon a patched Dunlop tyre.
I must have a peep through that, Watson. If you bend your back and support yourself upon the wall, I think that I can manage.
"Come, my friend," said he, "our day's work has been quite long enough. I think that we have gathered all that we can.
He hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the moor, nor would he enter the school when he reached it, but went on to Mackleton Station, whence he could send some telegrams.
"All goes well, my friend," said he. "I promise that before to-morrow evening we shall have reached the solution of the mystery."
At eleven o'clock next morning my friend and I were walking up the famous yew avenue of Holdernesse Hall.
We were ushered through the magnificent Elizabethan doorway and into his Grace's study. There we found Mr. James Wilder, demure and courtly, but with some trace of that wild terror of the night before still lurking in his furtive eyes and in his twitching features.
You have come to see his Grace? I am sorry; but the fact is that the Duke is far from well. He has been very much upset by the tragic news.
He greeted us with a stately courtesy and seated himself at his desk, his red beard streaming down on to the table.
"The fact is, your Grace," said he, "that my colleague, Dr. Watson, and myself had an assurance from Dr. Huxtable that a reward had been offered in this case.
It amounted, if I am correctly informed, to five thousand pounds to anyone who will tell you where your son is?
Under the latter heading is included, no doubt, not only those who may have taken him away, but also those who conspire to keep him in his present position?
"Yes, yes," cried the Duke, impatiently. "If you do your work well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you will have no reason to complain of niggardly treatment."
My friend rubbed his thin hands together with an appearance of avidity which was a surprise to me, who knew his frugal tastes.
"I fancy that I see your Grace's cheque-book upon the table," said he. "I should be glad if you would make me out a cheque for six thousand pounds.
It would be as well, perhaps, for you to cross it. The Capital and Counties Bank, Oxford Street branch, are my agents.
I mean that I have earned the reward. I know where your son is, and I know some, at least, of those who are holding him.
Sherlock Holmes's answer was an astounding one. He stepped swiftly forward and touched the Duke upon the shoulder.
Never shall I forget the Duke's appearance as he sprang up and clawed with his hands like one who is sinking into an abyss.
Then, with an extraordinary effort of aristocratic self-command, he sat down and sank his face in his hands.
I shall be as good as my word, Mr. Holmes. I am about to write your cheque, however unwelcome the information which you have gained may be to me.
When the offer was first made I little thought the turn which events might take. But you and your friend are men of discretion, Mr. Holmes?
I must put it plainly, Mr. Holmes. If only you two know of this incident, there is no reason why it should go any farther.
I fear, your Grace, that matters can hardly be arranged so easily. There is the death of this schoolmaster to be accounted for.
But James knew nothing of that. You cannot hold him responsible for that. It was the work of this brutal ruffian whom he had the misfortune to employ.
I must take the view, your Grace, that when a man embarks upon a crime he is morally guilty of any other crime which may spring from it.
The instant that he heard of it he made a complete confession to me, so filled was he with horror and remorse.
He lost not an hour in breaking entirely with the murderer. Oh, Mr. Holmes, you must save him--you must save him!
I tell you that you must save him!" The Duke had dropped the last attempt at self-command, and was pacing the room with a convulsed face and with his clenched hands raving in the air.
At last he mastered himself and sat down once more at his desk. "I appreciate your conduct in coming here before you spoke to anyone else," said he.
"Exactly," said Holmes. "I think, your Grace, that this can only be done by absolute and complete frankness between us.
I am disposed to help your Grace to the best of my ability; but in order to do so I must understand to the last detail how the matter stands.
Your Grace can hardly have heard of any small reputation which I possess, or you would not imagine that it is so easy to escape me.
Mr. Reuben Hayes was arrested at Chesterfield on my information at eleven o'clock last night. I had a telegram from the head of the local police before I left the school this morning.
"You seem to have powers that are hardly human," said he. "So Reuben Hayes is taken? I am right glad to hear it, if it will not react upon the fate of James."
What brought all his wicked scheme to wreck was your discovery of this man Heidegger's dead body. James was seized with horror at the news.
He made a complete voluntary confession. Then he implored me to keep his secret for three days longer, so as to give his wretched accomplice a chance of saving his guilty life.
I yielded--as I have always yielded--to his prayers, and instantly James hurried off to the Fighting Cock to warn Hayes and give him the means of flight.
I could not go there by daylight without provoking comment, but as soon as night fell I hurried off to see my dear Arthur.
You asked for frankness, Mr. Holmes, and I have taken you at your word, for I have now told you everything without an attempt at circumlocution or concealment.
"I will," said Holmes. "In the first place, your Grace, I am bound to tell you that you have placed yourself in a most serious position in the eyes of the law.
You have condoned a felony and you have aided the escape of a murderer; for I cannot doubt that any money which was taken by James Wilder to aid his accomplice in his flight came from your Grace's purse.
This is indeed a most serious matter. Even more culpable in my opinion, your Grace, is your attitude towards your younger son.
What are promises to such people as these? You have no guarantee that he will not be spirited away again.
To humour your guilty elder son you have exposed your innocent younger son to imminent and unnecessary danger.
The proud lord of Holdernesse was not accustomed to be so rated in his own ducal hall. The blood flushed into his high forehead, but his conscience held him dumb.
I will help you, but on one condition only. It is that you ring for the footman and let me give such orders as I like.
"Now," said Holmes, when the rejoicing lackey had disappeared, "having secured the future, we can afford to be more lenient with the past.
I am not in an official position, and there is no reason, so long as the ends of justice are served, why I should disclose all that I know.
From the police point of view he will have kidnapped the boy for the purpose of ransom. If they do not themselves find it out I see no reason why I should prompt them to take a broader point of view.
I would warn your Grace, however, that the continued presence of Mr. James Wilder in your household can only lead to misfortune.
I understand that, Mr. Holmes, and it is already settled that he shall leave me for ever and go to seek his fortune in Australia.
In that case, your Grace, since you have yourself stated that any unhappiness in your married life was caused by his presence, I would suggest that you make such amends as you can to the Duchess, and that you try to resume those relations which have been so unhappily interrupted.
"In that case," said Holmes, rising, "I think that my friend and I can congratulate ourselves upon several most happy results from our little visit to the North.
There is one other small point upon which I desire some light. This fellow Hayes had shod his horses with shoes which counterfeited the tracks of cows.
The Duke stood in thought for a moment, with a look of intense surprise on his face. Then he opened a door and showed us into a large room furnished as a museum.
"These shoes," it ran, "were dug up in the moat of Holdernesse Hall. They are for the use of horses; but they are shaped below with a cloven foot of iron, so as to throw pursuers off the track.
They are supposed to have belonged to some of the marauding Barons of Holdernesse in the Middle Ages.
Holmes opened the case, and moistening his finger he passed it along the shoe. A thin film of recent mud was left upon his skin.
"Thank you," said he, as he replaced the glass. "It is the second most interesting object that I have seen in the North."
Holmes folded up his cheque and placed it carefully in his note-book. "I am a poor man," said he, as he patted it affectionately and thrust it into the depths of his inner pocket.
Holmes, however, like all great artists, lived for his art's sake, and, save in the case of the Duke of Holdernesse, I have seldom known him claim any large reward for his inestimable services.
So unworldly was he--or so capricious--that he frequently refused his help to the powerful and wealthy where the problem made no appeal to his sympathies, while he would devote weeks of most intense application to the affairs of some humble client whose case presented those strange and dramatic qualities which appealed to his imagination and challenged his ingenuity.
Close on the heels of these two famous cases came the tragedy of Woodman's Lee, and the very obscure circumstances which surrounded the death of Captain Peter Carey.
No record of the doings of Mr. Sherlock Holmes would be complete which did not include some account of this very unusual affair.
During the first week of July my friend had been absent so often and so long from our lodgings that I knew he had something on hand.
He had at least five small refuges in different parts of London in which he was able to change his personality.
He had gone out before breakfast, and I had sat down to mine, when he strode into the room, his hat upon his head and a huge barbed-headed spear tucked like an umbrella under his arm.
"Good gracious, Holmes!" I cried. "You don't mean to say that you have been walking about London with that thing?"
And I return with an excellent appetite. There can be no question, my dear Watson, of the value of exercise before breakfast.
If you could have looked into Allardyce's back shop you would have seen a dead pig swung from a hook in the ceiling, and a gentleman in his shirt-sleeves furiously stabbing at it with this weapon.
I was that energetic person, and I have satisfied myself that by no exertion of my strength can I transfix the pig with a single blow.
Because it seemed to me to have an indirect bearing upon the mystery of Woodman's Lee. Ah, Hopkins, I got your wire last night, and I have been expecting you.
Our visitor was an exceedingly alert man, thirty years of age, dressed in a quiet tweed suit, but retaining the erect bearing of one who was accustomed to official uniform.
No, thank you, sir. I breakfasted before I came round. I spent the night in town, for I came up yesterday to report.
I wish to heavens that you would, Mr. Holmes. It's my first big chance, and I am at my wit's end. For goodness' sake come down and lend me a hand.
Well, well, it just happens that I have already read all the available evidence, including the report of the inquest, with some care.
By the way, what do you make of that tobacco-pouch found on the scene of the crime? Is there no clue there?
It was the man's own pouch, sir. His initials were inside it. And it was of seal-skin--and he an old sealer.
No, sir, we could find no pipe; indeed, he smoked very little. And yet he might have kept some tobacco for his friends.
No doubt. I only mention it because if I had been handling the case I should have been inclined to make that the starting-point of my investigation.
However, my friend Dr. Watson knows nothing of this matter, and I should be none the worse for hearing the sequence of events once more.
I know your methods, sir, and I applied them. Before I permitted anything to be moved I examined most carefully the ground outside, and also the floor of the room.
My good Hopkins, I have investigated many crimes, but I have never yet seen one which was committed by a flying creature.
As long as the criminal remains upon two legs so long must there be some indentation, some abrasion, some trifling displacement which can be detected by the scientific searcher.
It is incredible that this blood-bespattered room contained no trace which could have aided us. I understand, however, from the inquest that there were some objects which you failed to overlook?
I was a fool not to call you in at the time, Mr. Holmes. However, that's past praying for now. Yes, there were several objects in the room which called for special attention.
One was the harpoon with which the deed was committed. It had been snatched down from a rack on the wall.
Two others remained there, and there was a vacant place for the third. On the stock was engraved 'Ss.
SEA UNICORN, Dundee.' This seemed to establish that the crime had been done in a moment of fury, and that the murderer had seized the first weapon which came in his way.
The fact that the crime was committed at two in the morning, and yet Peter Carey was fully dressed, suggested that he had an appointment with the murderer, which is borne out by the fact that a bottle of rum and two dirty glasses stood upon the table.
"Yes," said Holmes; "I think that both inferences are permissible. Was there any other spirit but rum in the room?"
Yes; there was a tantalus containing brandy and whisky on the sea-chest. It is of no importance to us, however, since the decanters were full, and it had therefore not been used.
"For all that its presence has some significance," said Holmes. "However, let us hear some more about the objects which do seem to you to bear upon the case."
It lay in the middle. It was of coarse seal-skin--the straight-haired skin, with a leather thong to bind it.
Stanley Hopkins drew from his pocket a drab-covered note-book. The outside was rough and worn, the leaves discoloured.
On the first page were written the initials "J.H.N." and the date "1883." Holmes laid it on the table and examined it in his minute way, while Hopkins and I gazed over each shoulder.
On the second page were the printed letters "C.P.R.," and then came several sheets of numbers. Another heading was Argentine, another Costa Rica, and another San Paulo, each with pages of signs and figures after it.
They appear to be lists of Stock Exchange securities. I thought that 'J.H.N.' were the initials of a broker, and that 'C.P.R.'
"What a fool I have been!" he cried. "Of course, it is as you say. Then 'J.H.N.' are the only initials we have to solve.
I have already examined the old Stock Exchange lists, and I can find no one in 1883 either in the House or among the outside brokers whose initials correspond with these.
I would also urge that the introduction into the case of a document relating to large masses of valuable securities gives us for the first time some indication of a motive for the crime.
"I must admit both your points," said he. "I confess that this note-book, which did not appear at the inquest, modifies any views which I may have formed.
I had come to a theory of the crime in which I can find no place for this. Have you endeavoured to trace any of the securities here mentioned?
Inquiries are now being made at the offices, but I fear that the complete register of the stockholders of these South American concerns is in South America, and that some weeks must elapse before we can trace the shares.
Exactly, Mr. Holmes. I appreciated that point, and I conjectured that it was dropped by the murderer in his hurried flight.
A sheath-knife, still in its sheath. It lay at the feet of the dead man. Mrs. Carey has identified it as being her husband's property.
"It would have been an easier task a week ago," said he. "But even now my visit may not be entirely fruitless.
Watson, if you can spare the time I should be very glad of your company. If you will call a four-wheeler, Hopkins, we shall be ready to start for Forest Row in a quarter of an hour.
Here in a clearing upon the green slope of a hill stood a long, low stone house, approached by a curving drive running through the fields.
Nearer the road, and surrounded on three sides by bushes, was a small outhouse, one window and the door facing in our direction.
It was a terrible household that Black Peter Carey had made for himself, and it was with a sense of relief that we found ourselves in the sunlight again and making our way along a path which had been worn across the fields by the feet of the dead man.
The outhouse was the simplest of dwellings, wooden-walled, shingle-roofed, one window beside the door and one on the farther side.
Stanley Hopkins drew the key from his pocket, and had stooped to the lock, when he paused with a look of attention and surprise upon his face.
There could be no doubt of the fact. The woodwork was cut and the scratches showed white through the paint, as if they had been that instant done.
Someone has tried to force this also. Whoever it was has failed to make his way in. He must have been a very poor burglar.
"This is a most extraordinary thing," said the inspector; "I could swear that these marks were not here yesterday evening."
Very unlikely. Few of them would dare to set foot in the grounds, far less try to force their way into the cabin.
It is very probable. He came expecting to find the door open. He tried to get in with the blade of a very small penknife.
So I should say. It will be our fault if we are not there to receive him. Meanwhile, let me see the inside of the cabin.
The traces of the tragedy had been removed, but the furniture within the little room still stood as it had been on the night of the crime.
For two hours, with most intense concentration, Holmes examined every object in turn, but his face showed that his quest was not a successful one.
Something has been taken. There is less dust in this corner of the shelf than elsewhere. It may have been a book lying on its side.
It may have been a box. Well, well, I can do nothing more. Let us walk in these beautiful woods, Watson, and give a few hours to the birds and the flowers.
We shall meet you here later, Hopkins, and see if we can come to closer quarters with the gentleman who has paid this visit in the night.
It was past eleven o'clock when we formed our little ambuscade. Hopkins was for leaving the door of the hut open, but Holmes was of the opinion that this would rouse the suspicions of the stranger.
In this way we should be able to watch our man if he struck a light, and see what his object was in this stealthy nocturnal visit.
It was a long and melancholy vigil, and yet brought with it something of the thrill which the hunter feels when he lies beside the water pool and waits for the coming of the thirsty beast of prey.
What savage creature was it which might steal upon us out of the darkness? Was it a fierce tiger of crime, which could only be taken fighting hard with flashing fang and claw, or would it prove to be some skulking jackal, dangerous only to the weak and unguarded?
In absolute silence we crouched amongst the bushes, waiting for whatever might come. At first the steps of a few belated villagers, or the sound of voices from the village, lightened our vigil; but one by one these interruptions died away and an absolute stillness fell upon us, save for the chimes of the distant church, which told us of the progress of the night, and for the rustle and whisper of a fine rain falling amid the foliage which roofed us in.
Half-past two had chimed, and it was the darkest hour which precedes the dawn, when we all started as a low but sharp click came from the direction of the gate.
The man was trying to force the lock! This time his skill was greater or his tool was better, for there was a sudden snap and the creak of the hinges.
Then a match was struck, and next instant the steady light from a candle filled the interior of the hut.
The nocturnal visitor was a young man, frail and thin, with a black moustache which intensified the deadly pallor of his face.
He was dressed like a gentleman, in Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers, with a cloth cap upon his head.
We watched him staring round with frightened eyes. Then he laid the candle-end upon the table and disappeared from our view into one of the corners.
Then, with an angry gesture of his clenched hand, he closed the book, replaced it in the corner, and put out the light.
He had hardly turned to leave the hut when Hopkins's hand was on the fellow's collar, and I heard his loud gasp of terror as he understood that he was taken.
The candle was re-lit, and there was our wretched captive shivering and cowering in the grasp of the detective.
"You are detectives, I suppose?" said he. "You imagine I am connected with the death of Captain Peter Carey.
"Well, I will tell you," he said. "Why should I not? And yet I hate to think of this old scandal gaining a new lease of life.
"You mean the West-country bankers," said he. "They failed for a million, ruined half the county families of Cornwall, and Neligan disappeared."
At last we were getting something positive, and yet it seemed a long gap between an absconding banker and Captain Peter Carey pinned against the wall with one of his own harpoons.
I came down to Sussex with the intention of seeing the captain, but it was at this moment that his terrible death occurred.
I read at the inquest a description of his cabin, in which it stated that the old log-books of his vessel were preserved in it.
It struck me that if I could see what occurred in the month of August, 1883, on board the SEA UNICORN, I might settle the mystery of my father's fate.
"Then how do you account for THAT?" cried Hopkins, as he held up the damning note-book, with the initials of our prisoner on the first leaf and the blood-stain on the cover.
"That is enough," said Hopkins, sternly. "Whatever else you have to say you must say in court. You will walk down with me now to the police-station.
Rooms have been reserved for you at the Brambletye Hotel, so we can all walk down to the village together.
Oh, yes, my dear Watson, I am perfectly satisfied. At the same time Stanley Hopkins's methods do not commend themselves to me.
I am disappointed in Stanley Hopkins. I had hoped for better things from him. One should always look for a possible alternative and provide against it.
The line of investigation which I have myself been pursuing. It may give us nothing. I cannot tell. But at least I shall follow it to the end.
Several letters were waiting for Holmes at Baker Street. He snatched one of them up, opened it, and burst out into a triumphant chuckle of laughter.
Excellent, Watson. The alternative develops. Have you telegraph forms? Just write a couple of messages for me: 'Sumner, Shipping Agent, Ratcliff Highway.
Send three men on, to arrive ten to-morrow morning.--Basil.' That's my name in those parts. The other is: 'Inspector Stanley Hopkins, 46, Lord Street, Brixton.
Come breakfast to-morrow at nine-thirty. Important. Wire if unable to come.--Sherlock Holmes.' There, Watson, this infernal case has haunted me for ten days.
I hereby banish it completely from my presence. To-morrow I trust that we shall hear the last of it for ever.
Sharp at the hour named Inspector Stanley Hopkins appeared, and we sat down together to the excellent breakfast which Mrs. Hudson had prepared.
Undoubtedly. I find that young Neligan arrived at the Brambletye Hotel on the very day of the crime. He came on the pretence of playing golf.
His room was on the ground-floor, and he could get out when he liked. That very night he went down to Woodman's Lee, saw Peter Carey at the hut, quarrelled with him, and killed him with the harpoon.
Then, horrified by what he had done, he fled out of the hut, dropping the note-book which he had brought with him in order to question Peter Carey about these different securities.
You may have observed that some of them were marked with ticks, and the others--the great majority--were not.
After his flight he did not dare to approach the hut again for some time; but at last he forced himself to do so in order to obtain the information which he needed.
It seems to me to have only one drawback, Hopkins, and that is that it is intrinsically impossible. Have you tried to drive a harpoon through a body?
No? Tut, tut, my dear sir, you must really pay attention to these details. My friend Watson could tell you that I spent a whole morning in that exercise.
It is no easy matter, and requires a strong and practised arm. But this blow was delivered with such violence that the head of the weapon sank deep into the wall.
Do you imagine that this anaemic youth was capable of so frightful an assault? Is he the man who hobnobbed in rum and water with Black Peter in the dead of the night?
Was it his profile that was seen on the blind two nights before? No, no, Hopkins; it is another and a more formidable person for whom we must seek.
The detective's face had grown longer and longer during Holmes's speech. His hopes and his ambitions were all crumbling about him.
You can't deny that Neligan was present that night, Mr. Holmes. The book will prove that. I fancy that I have evidence enough to satisfy a jury, even if you are able to pick a hole in it.
Besides, Mr. Holmes, I have laid my hand upon MY man. As to this terrible person of yours, where is he?
"I rather fancy that he is on the stair," said Holmes, serenely. "I think, Watson, that you would do well to put that revolver where you can reach it."
There had been some talking in gruff voices outside, and now Mrs. Hudson opened the door to say that there were three men inquiring for Captain Basil.
I am sorry, Lancaster, but the berth is full. Here is half a sovereign for your trouble. Just step into this room and wait there for a few minutes.
The second man was a long, dried-up creature, with lank hair and sallow cheeks. His name was Hugh Pattins.
"Yes, sir." He took a sheaf of worn and greasy forms from his pocket. Holmes glanced over them and returned them.
"You are just the man I want," said he. "Here's the agreement on the side-table. If you sign it the whole matter will be settled."
I heard a click of steel and a bellow like an enraged bull. The next instant Holmes and the seaman were rolling on the ground together.
Only when I pressed the cold muzzle of the revolver to his temple did he at last understand that resistance was vain.
"I must really apologize, Hopkins," said Sherlock Holmes; "I fear that the scrambled eggs are cold. However, you will enjoy the rest of your breakfast all the better, will you not, for the thought that you have brought your case to a triumphant conclusion."
"I don't know what to say, Mr. Holmes," he blurted out at last, with a very red face. "It seems to me that I have been making a fool of myself from the beginning.
I understand now, what I should never have forgotten, that I am the pupil and you are the master. Even now I see what you have done, but I don't know how you did it, or what it signifies.
"Well, well," said Holmes, good-humouredly. "We all learn by experience, and your lesson this time is that you should never lose sight of the alternative.
You were so absorbed in young Neligan that you could not spare a thought to Patrick Cairns, the true murderer of Peter Carey.
"See here, mister," said he, "I make no complaint of being man-handled in this fashion, but I would have you call things by their right names.
You say I murdered Peter Carey; I say I KILLED Peter Carey, and there's all the difference. Maybe you don't believe what I say.
It's soon told, and, by the Lord, every word of it is truth. I knew Black Peter, and when he pulled out his knife I whipped a harpoon through him sharp, for I knew that it was him or me.
That's how he died. You can call it murder. Anyhow, I'd as soon die with a rope round my neck as with Black Peter's knife in my heart.
Well, when I came to examine the box I found there was no money in it, and nothing but papers that I would not dare to sell.
I had lost my hold on Black Peter, and was stranded in London without a shilling. There was only my trade left.
I saw these advertisements about harpooners and high wages, so I went to the shipping agents, and they sent me here.
That's all I know, and I say again that if I killed Black Peter the law should give me thanks, for I saved them the price of a hempen rope.
"A very clear statement," said Holmes, rising and lighting his pipe. "I think, Hopkins, that you should lose no time in conveying your prisoner to a place of safety.
This room is not well adapted for a cell, and Mr. Patrick Cairns occupies too large a proportion of our carpet.
"Mr. Holmes," said Hopkins, "I do not know how to express my gratitude. Even now I do not understand how you attained this result."
Simply by having the good fortune to get the right clue from the beginning. It is very possible if I had known about this note-book it might have led away my thoughts, as it did yours.
I was convinced that the initials 'P.C.' upon the pouch were a coincidence, and not those of Peter Carey, since he seldom smoked, and no pipe was found in his cabin.
You remember that I asked whether whisky and brandy were in the cabin. You said they were. How many landsmen are there who would drink rum when they could get these other spirits?
My dear sir, the problem had become a very simple one. If it were a seaman, it could only be a seaman who had been with him on the SEA UNICORN.
So far as I could learn he had sailed in no other ship. I spent three days in wiring to Dundee, and at the end of that time I had ascertained the names of the crew of the SEA UNICORN in 1883.
When I found Patrick Cairns among the harpooners my research was nearing its end. I argued that the man was probably in London, and that he would desire to leave the country for a time.
I therefore spent some days in the East-end, devised an Arctic expedition, put forth tempting terms for harpooners who would serve under Captain Basil--and behold the result!
"You must obtain the release of young Neligan as soon as possible," said Holmes. "I confess that I think you owe him some apology.
The tin box must be returned to him, but, of course, the securities which Peter Carey has sold are lost for ever.
There's the cab, Hopkins, and you can remove your man. If you want me for the trial, my address and that of Watson will be somewhere in Norway--I'll send particulars later.
IT is years since the incidents of which I speak took place, and yet it is with diffidence that I allude to them.
It records an absolutely unique experience in the career both of Mr. Sherlock Holmes and of myself. The reader will excuse me if I conceal the date or any other fact by which he might trace the actual occurrence.
We had been out for one of our evening rambles, Holmes and I, and had returned about six o'clock on a cold, frosty winter's evening.
As Holmes turned up the lamp the light fell upon a card on the table. He glanced at it, and then, with an ejaculation of disgust, threw it on the floor.
"The worst man in London," Holmes answered, as he sat down and stretched his legs before the fire. "Is anything on the back of the card?"
Well, that's how Milverton impresses me. I've had to do with fifty murderers in my career, but the worst of them never gave me the repulsion which I have for this fellow.
I'll tell you, Watson. He is the king of all the blackmailers. Heaven help the man, and still more the woman, whose secret and reputation come into the power of Milverton.
With a smiling face and a heart of marble he will squeeze and squeeze until he has drained them dry. The fellow is a genius in his way, and would have made his mark in some more savoury trade.
His method is as follows: He allows it to be known that he is prepared to pay very high sums for letters which compromise people of wealth or position.
He receives these wares not only from treacherous valets or maids, but frequently from genteel ruffians who have gained the confidence and affection of trusting women.
He deals with no niggard hand. I happen to know that he paid seven hundred pounds to a footman for a note two lines in length, and that the ruin of a noble family was the result.
Everything which is in the market goes to Milverton, and there are hundreds in this great city who turn white at his name.
No one knows where his grip may fall, for he is far too rich and far too cunning to work from hand to mouth.
He will hold a card back for years in order to play it at the moment when the stake is best worth winning.
I have said that he is the worst man in London, and I would ask you how could one compare the ruffian who in hot blood bludgeons his mate with this man, who methodically and at his leisure tortures the soul and wrings the nerves in order to add to his already swollen money-bags?
Technically, no doubt, but practically not. What would it profit a woman, for example, to get him a few months' imprisonment if her own ruin must immediately follow?
His victims dare not hit back. If ever he blackmailed an innocent person, then, indeed, we should have him; but he is as cunning as the Evil One.
Because an illustrious client has placed her piteous case in my hands. It is the Lady Eva Brackwell, the most beautiful DEBUTANTE of last season.
They would suffice to break off the match. Milverton will send the letters to the Earl unless a large sum of money is paid him.
At that instant there was a clatter and a rattle in the street below. Looking down I saw a stately carriage and pair, the brilliant lamps gleaming on the glossy haunches of the noble chestnuts.
A footman opened the door, and a small, stout man in a shaggy astrachan overcoat descended. A minute later he was in the room.
There was something of Mr. Pickwick's benevolence in his appearance, marred only by the insincerity of the fixed smile and by the hard glitter of those restless and penetrating eyes.
His voice was as smooth and suave as his countenance, as he advanced with a plump little hand extended, murmuring his regret for having missed us at his first visit.
Holmes disregarded the outstretched hand and looked at him with a face of granite. Milverton's smile broadened; he shrugged his shoulders, removed his overcoat, folded it with great deliberation over the back of a chair, and then took a seat.
Very good, Mr. Holmes. It is only in your client's interests that I protested. The matter is so very delicate----
Then we can proceed to business. You say that you are acting for Lady Eva. Has she empowered you to accept my terms?
My dear sir, it is painful for me to discuss it; but if the money is not paid on the 14th there certainly will be no marriage on the 18th.
"You appear to me," he said, at last, "to be taking matters too much for granted. I am, of course, familiar with the contents of these letters.
My client will certainly do what I may advise. I shall counsel her to tell her future husband the whole story and to trust to his generosity.
"They are sprightly--very sprightly," Milverton answered. "The lady was a charming correspondent. But I can assure you that the Earl of Dovercourt would fail to appreciate them.
"Wait a little," he said. "You go too fast. We would certainly make every effort to avoid scandal in so delicate a matter."
I beg, therefore, that you will moderate your demands, and that you will return the letters at the price I indicate, which is, I assure you, the highest that you can get.
They may hesitate as to an acceptable wedding present. Let me assure them that this little bundle of letters would give more joy than all the candelabra and butter-dishes in London.
"Dear me, dear me, how unfortunate!" cried Milverton, taking out a bulky pocket-book. "I cannot help thinking that ladies are ill-advised in not making an effort.
Look at this!" He held up a little note with a coat-of-arms upon the envelope. "That belongs to--well, perhaps it is hardly fair to tell the name until to-morrow morning.
But at that time it will be in the hands of the lady's husband. And all because she will not find a beggarly sum which she could get by turning her diamonds into paste.
It IS such a pity. Now, you remember the sudden end of the engagement between the Honourable Miss Miles and Colonel Dorking?
Only two days before the wedding there was a paragraph in the MORNING POST to say that it was all off.
And why? It is almost incredible, but the absurd sum of twelve hundred pounds would have settled the whole question.
Is it not pitiful? And here I find you, a man of sense, boggling about terms when your client's future and honour are at stake.
"What I say is true," Holmes answered. "The money cannot be found. Surely it is better for you to take the substantial sum which I offer than to ruin this woman's career, which can profit you in no way?"
There you make a mistake, Mr. Holmes. An exposure would profit me indirectly to a considerable extent.
I have eight or ten similar cases maturing. If it was circulated among them that I had made a severe example of the Lady Eva I should find all of them much more open to reason.
Milverton had glided as quick as a rat to the side of the room, and stood with his back against the wall.
"Mr. Holmes, Mr. Holmes," he said, turning the front of his coat and exhibiting the butt of a large revolver, which projected from the inside pocket.
I have been expecting you to do something original. This has been done so often, and what good has ever come from it?
I assure you that I am armed to the teeth, and I am perfectly prepared to use my weapons, knowing that the law will support me.
Besides, your supposition that I would bring the letters here in a note-book is entirely mistaken. I would do nothing so foolish.
And now, gentlemen, I have one or two little interviews this evening, and it is a long drive to Hampstead.
He stepped forward, took up his coat, laid his hand on his revolver, and turned to the door. I picked up a chair, but Holmes shook his head and I laid it down again.
With bow, a smile, and a twinkle Milverton was out of the room, and a few moments after we heard the slam of the carriage door and the rattle of the wheels as he drove away.
Holmes sat motionless by the fire, his hands buried deep in his trouser pockets, his chin sunk upon his breast, his eyes fixed upon the glowing embers.
For half an hour he was silent and still. Then, with the gesture of a man who has taken his decision, he sprang to his feet and passed into his bedroom.
A little later a rakish young workman with a goatee beard and a swagger lit his clay pipe at the lamp before descending into the street.
"I'll be back some time, Watson," said he, and vanished into the night. I understood that he had opened his campaign against Charles Augustus Milverton; but I little dreamed the strange shape which that campaign was destined to take.
For some days Holmes came and went at all hours in this attire, but beyond a remark that his time was spent at Hampstead, and that it was not wasted, I knew nothing of what he was doing.
At last, however, on a wild, tempestuous evening, when the wind screamed and rattled against the windows, he returned from his last expedition, and having removed his disguise he sat before the fire and laughed heartily in his silent inward fashion.
It was a most necessary step. I am a plumber with a rising business, Escott by name. I have walked out with her each evening, and I have talked with her.
Good heavens, those talks! However, I have got all I wanted. I know Milverton's house as I know the palm of my hand.
You can't help it, my dear Watson. You must play your cards as best you can when such a stake is on the table.
However, I rejoice to say that I have a hated rival who will certainly cut me out the instant that my back is turned.
I had a catching of the breath, and my skin went cold at the words, which were slowly uttered in a tone of concentrated resolution.
As a flash of lightning in the night shows up in an instant every detail of a wide landscape, so at one glance I seemed to see every possible result of such an action--the detection, the capture, the honoured career ending in irreparable failure and disgrace, my friend himself lying at the mercy of the odious Milverton.
My dear fellow, I have given it every consideration. I am never precipitate in my actions, nor would I adopt so energetic and indeed so dangerous a course if any other were possible.
Let us look at the matter clearly and fairly. I suppose that you will admit that the action is morally justifiable, though technically criminal.
To burgle his house is no more than to forcibly take his pocket-book--an action in which you were prepared to aid me.
"Yes," I said; "it is morally justifiable so long as our object is to take no articles save those which are used for an illegal purpose."
Exactly. Since it is morally justifiable I have only to consider the question of personal risk. Surely a gentleman should not lay much stress upon this when a lady is in most desperate need of his help?
Well, that is part of the risk. There is no other possible way of regaining these letters. The unfortunate lady has not the money, and there are none of her people in whom she could confide.
To-morrow is the last day of grace, and unless we can get the letters to-night this villain will be as good as his word and will bring about her ruin.
I must, therefore, abandon my client to her fate or I must play this last card. Between ourselves, Watson, it's a sporting duel between this fellow Milverton and me.
He had, as you saw, the best of the first exchanges; but my self-respect and my reputation are concerned to fight it to a finish.
"Then you are not going," said I. "I give you my word of honour--and I never broke it in my life--that I will take a cab straight to the police-station and give you away unless you let me share this adventure with you."
How do you know that? You can't tell what may happen. Anyway, my resolution is taken. Other people beside you have self-respect and even reputations.
Well, well, my dear fellow, be it so. We have shared the same room for some years, and it would be amusing if we ended by sharing the same cell.
You know, Watson, I don't mind confessing to you that I have always had an idea that I would have made a highly efficient criminal.
This is the chance of my lifetime in that direction. See here!" He took a neat little leather case out of a drawer, and opening it he exhibited a number of shining instruments.
This is a first-class, up-to-date burgling kit, with nickel-plated jemmy, diamond-tipped glass-cutter, adaptable keys, and every modern improvement which the march of civilization demands.
I can see that you have a strong natural turn for this sort of thing. Very good; do you make the masks.
We shall have some cold supper before we start. It is now nine-thirty. At eleven we shall drive as far as Church Row.
It is a quarter of an hour's walk from there to Appledore Towers. We shall be at work before midnight.
Milverton is a heavy sleeper and retires punctually at ten-thirty. With any luck we should be back here by two, with the Lady Eva's letters in my pocket.
Holmes and I put on our dress-clothes, so that we might appear to be two theatre-goers homeward bound.
In Oxford Street we picked up a hansom and drove to an address in Hampstead. Here we paid off our cab, and with our great-coats buttoned up, for it was bitterly cold and the wind seemed to blow through us, we walked along the edge of the Heath.
"It's a business that needs delicate treatment," said Holmes. "These documents are contained in a safe in the fellow's study, and the study is the ante-room of his bed-chamber.
On the other hand, like all these stout, little men who do themselves well, he is a plethoric sleeper.
Agatha--that's my FIANCEE--says it is a joke in the servants' hall that it's impossible to wake the master.
He has a secretary who is devoted to his interests and never budges from the study all day. That's why we are going at night.
Then he has a beast of a dog which roams the garden. I met Agatha late the last two evenings, and she locks the brute up so as to give me a clear run.
This is the house, this big one in its own grounds. Through the gate--now to the right among the laurels.
We might put on our masks here, I think. You see, there is not a glimmer of light in any of the windows, and everything is working splendidly.
With our black silk face-coverings, which turned us into two of the most truculent figures in London, we stole up to the silent, gloomy house.
"That's his bedroom," Holmes whispered. "This door opens straight into the study. It would suit us best, but it is bolted as well as locked, and we should make too much noise getting in.
The place was locked, but Holmes removed a circle of glass and turned the key from the inside. An instant afterwards he had closed the door behind us, and we had become felons in the eyes of the law.
The thick, warm air of the conservatory and the rich, choking fragrance of exotic plants took us by the throat.
He seized my hand in the darkness and led me swiftly past banks of shrubs which brushed against our faces.
He felt his way among the furniture, opened another door, and closed it behind us. Putting out my hand I felt several coats hanging from the wall, and I understood that I was in a passage.
A fire was burning in this new room, and again the air was heavy with tobacco smoke. Holmes entered on tiptoe, waited for me to follow, and then very gently closed the door.
It was a good fire, and the room was illuminated by it. Near the door I saw the gleam of an electric switch, but it was unnecessary, even if it had been safe, to turn it on.
At one side of the fireplace was a heavy curtain, which covered the bay window we had seen from outside.
On the other side was the door which communicated with the veranda. A desk stood in the centre, with a turning chair of shining red leather.
Holmes stole across and looked at it. Then he crept to the door of the bedroom, and stood with slanting head listening intently.
No sound came from within. Meanwhile it had struck me that it would be wise to secure our retreat through the outer door, so I examined it.
To my amazement it was neither locked nor bolted! I touched Holmes on the arm, and he turned his masked face in that direction.
"I don't like it," he whispered, putting his lips to my very ear. "I can't quite make it out. Anyhow, we have no time to lose."
Yes; stand by the door. If you hear anyone come, bolt it on the inside, and we can get away as we came.
If they come the other way, we can get through the door if our job is done, or hide behind these window curtains if it is not.
I nodded and stood by the door. My first feeling of fear had passed away, and I thrilled now with a keener zest than I had ever enjoyed when we were the defenders of the law instead of its defiers.
The high object of our mission, the consciousness that it was unselfish and chivalrous, the villainous character of our opponent, all added to the sporting interest of the adventure.
Turning up the cuffs of his dress-coat--he had placed his overcoat on a chair--Holmes laid out two drills, a jemmy, and several skeleton keys.
I stood at the centre door with my eyes glancing at each of the others, ready for any emergency; though, indeed, my plans were somewhat vague as to what I should do if we were interrupted.
For half an hour Holmes worked with concentrated energy, laying down one tool, picking up another, handling each with the strength and delicacy of the trained mechanic.
Finally I heard a click, the broad green door swung open, and inside I had a glimpse of a number of paper packets, each tied, sealed, and inscribed.
Suddenly I saw him halt, listen intently, and then in an instant he had swung the door of the safe to, picked up his coat, stuffed his tools into the pockets, and darted behind the window curtain, motioning me to do the same.
It was only when I had joined him there that I heard what had alarmed his quicker senses. There was a noise somewhere within the house.
A door slammed in the distance. Then a confused, dull murmur broke itself into the measured thud of heavy footsteps rapidly approaching.
They were in the passage outside the room. They paused at the door. The door opened. There was a sharp snick as the electric light was turned on.
The door closed once more, and the pungent reek of a strong cigar was borne to our nostrils. Then the footsteps continued backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, within a few yards of us.
Finally, there was a creak from a chair, and the footsteps ceased. Then a key clicked in a lock and I heard the rustle of papers.
So far I had not dared to look out, but now I gently parted the division of the curtains in front of me and peeped through.
From the pressure of Holmes's shoulder against mine I knew that he was sharing my observations. Right in front of us, and almost within our reach, was the broad, rounded back of Milverton.
His broad, grizzled head, with its shining patch of baldness, was in the immediate foreground of our vision.
He was leaning far back in the red leather chair, his legs outstretched, a long black cigar projecting at an angle from his mouth.
I felt Holmes's hand steal into mine and give me a reassuring shake, as if to say that the situation was within his powers and that he was easy in his mind.
I was not sure whether he had seen what was only too obvious from my position, that the door of the safe was imperfectly closed, and that Milverton might at any moment observe it.
But Milverton never looked up. He was languidly interested by the papers in his hand, and page after page was turned as he followed the argument of the lawyer.
At least, I thought, when he has finished the document and the cigar he will go to his room; but before he had reached the end of either there came a remarkable development which turned our thoughts into quite another channel.
Several times I had observed that Milverton looked at his watch, and once he had risen and sat down again, with a gesture of impatience.
The idea, however, that he might have an appointment at so strange an hour never occurred to me until a faint sound reached my ears from the veranda outside.
Milverton dropped his papers and sat rigid in his chair. The sound was repeated, and then there came a gentle tap at the door.
So this was the explanation of the unlocked door and of the nocturnal vigil of Milverton. There was the gentle rustle of a woman's dress.
I had closed the slit between the curtains as Milverton's face had turned in our direction, but now I ventured very carefully to open it once more.
He had resumed his seat, the cigar still projecting at an insolent angle from the corner of his mouth.
In front of him, in the full glare of the electric light, there stood a tall, slim, dark woman, a veil over her face, a mantle drawn round her chin.
Her breath came quick and fast, and every inch of the lithe figure was quivering with strong emotion.
"Well," said Milverton, "you've made me lose a good night's rest, my dear. I hope you'll prove worth it.
Well, if you couldn't you couldn't. If the Countess is a hard mistress you have your chance to get level with her now.
Bless the girl, what are you shivering about? That's right! Pull yourself together! Now, let us get down to business.
He took a note from the drawer of his desk. "You say that you have five letters which compromise the Countess d'Albert.
You want to sell them. I want to buy them. So far so good. It only remains to fix a price. I should want to inspect the letters, of course.
The woman without a word had raised her veil and dropped the mantle from her chin. It was a dark, handsome, clear-cut face which confronted Milverton, a face with a curved nose, strong, dark eyebrows shading hard, glittering eyes, and a straight, thin-lipped mouth set in a dangerous smile.
Milverton laughed, but fear vibrated in his voice. "You were so very obstinate," said he. "Why did you drive me to such extremities?
I assure you I wouldn't hurt a fly of my own accord, but every man has his business, and what was I to do?
So you sent the letters to my husband, and he--the noblest gentleman that ever lived, a man whose boots I was never worthy to lace--he broke his gallant heart and died.
Yes, you never thought to see me here again, but it was that night which taught me how I could meet you face to face, and alone.
"Don't imagine that you can bully me," said he, rising to his feet. "I have only to raise my voice, and I could call my servants and have you arrested.
But I will make allowance for your natural anger. Leave the room at once as you came, and I will say no more.
You will ruin no more lives as you ruined mine. You will wring no more hearts as you wrung mine. I will free the world of a poisonous thing.
She had drawn a little, gleaming revolver, and emptied barrel after barrel into Milverton's body, the muzzle within two feet of his shirt front.
He shrank away and then fell forward upon the table, coughing furiously and clawing among the papers.
Then he staggered to his feet, received another shot, and rolled upon the floor. "You've done me," he cried, and lay still.
The woman looked at him intently and ground her heel into his upturned face. She looked again, but there was no sound or movement.
But hardly had the woman rushed from the room when Holmes, with swift, silent steps, was over at the other door.
He turned the key in the lock. At the same instant we heard voices in the house and the sound of hurrying feet.
The revolver shots had roused the household. With perfect coolness Holmes slipped across to the safe, filled his two arms with bundles of letters, and poured them all into the fire.
Again and again he did it, until the safe was empty. Someone turned the handle and beat upon the outside of the door.
Holmes looked swiftly round. The letter which had been the messenger of death for Milverton lay, all mottled with his blood, upon the table.
Holmes tossed it in among the blazing papers. Then he drew the key from the outer door, passed through after me, and locked it on the outside.
I could not have believed that an alarm could have spread so swiftly. Looking back, the huge house was one blaze of light.
Holmes seemed to know the ground perfectly, and he threaded his way swiftly among a plantation of small trees, I close at his heels, and our foremost pursuer panting behind us.
I fell upon my face among some bushes; but Holmes had me on my feet in an instant, and together we dashed away across the huge expanse of Hampstead Heath.
We had run two miles, I suppose, before Holmes at last halted and listened intently. All was absolute silence behind us.
We had breakfasted and were smoking our morning pipe on the day after the remarkable experience which I have recorded when Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, very solemn and impressive, was ushered into our modest sitting-room.
I thought that, perhaps, if you had nothing particular on hand, you might care to assist us in a most remarkable case which occurred only last night at Hampstead.
It is no ordinary crime. We have had our eyes upon this Mr. Milverton for some time, and, between ourselves, he was a bit of a villain.
He is known to have held papers which he used for blackmailing purposes. These papers have all been burned by the murderers.
No article of value was taken, as it is probable that the criminals were men of good position, whose sole object was to prevent social exposure.
Yes, there were two of them. They were, as nearly as possible, captured red-handed. We have their foot-marks, we have their description; it's ten to one that we trace them.
The first fellow was a bit too active, but the second was caught by the under-gardener and only got away after a struggle.
No, it's no use arguing. I have made up my mind. My sympathies are with the criminals rather than with the victim, and I will not handle this case.
We were in the middle of our lunch when he suddenly sprang to his feet. "By Jove, Watson; I've got it!"
Here on the left hand there stands a shop window filled with photographs of the celebrities and beauties of the day.
Holmes's eyes fixed themselves upon one of them, and following his gaze I saw the picture of a regal and stately lady in Court dress, with a high diamond tiara upon her noble head.
I looked at that delicately-curved nose, at the marked eyebrows, at the straight mouth, and the strong little chin beneath it.
Then I caught my breath as I read the time-honoured title of the great nobleman and statesman whose wife she had been.
In return for the news which Lestrade would bring, Holmes was always ready to listen with attention to the details of any case upon which the detective was engaged, and was able occasionally, without any active interference, to give some hint or suggestion drawn from his own vast knowledge and experience.
On this particular evening Lestrade had spoken of the weather and the newspapers. Then he had fallen silent, puffing thoughtfully at his cigar.
Well, Mr. Holmes, there is no use denying that there IS something on my mind. And yet it is such an absurd business that I hesitated to bother you about it.
On the other hand, although it is trivial, it is undoubtedly queer, and I know that you have a taste for all that is out of the common.
Madness, anyhow. And a queer madness too! You wouldn't think there was anyone living at this time of day who had such a hatred of Napoleon the First that he would break any image of him that he could see.
Exactly. That's what I said. But then, when the man commits burglary in order to break images which are not his own, that brings it away from the doctor and on to the policeman.
His residence and principal consulting-room is at Kennington Road, but he has a branch surgery and dispensary at Lower Brixton Road, two miles away.
This Dr. Barnicot is an enthusiastic admirer of Napoleon, and his house is full of books, pictures, and relics of the French Emperor.
Some little time ago he purchased from Morse Hudson two duplicate plaster casts of the famous head of Napoleon by the French sculptor, Devine.
One of these he placed in his hall in the house at Kennington Road, and the other on the mantelpiece of the surgery at Lower Brixton.
Well, when Dr. Barnicot came down this morning he was astonished to find that his house had been burgled during the night, but that nothing had been taken save the plaster head from the hall.
It had been carried out and had been dashed savagely against the garden wall, under which its splintered fragments were discovered.
It had been smashed to atoms where it stood. In neither case were there any signs which could give us a clue as to the criminal or lunatic who had done the mischief.
"They are singular, not to say grotesque," said Holmes. "May I ask whether the two busts smashed in Dr. Barnicot's rooms were the exact duplicates of the one which was destroyed in Morse Hudson's shop?"
Such a fact must tell against the theory that the man who breaks them is influenced by any general hatred of Napoleon.
Considering how many hundreds of statues of the great Emperor must exist in London, it is too much to suppose such a coincidence as that a promiscuous iconoclast should chance to begin upon three specimens of the same bust.
So, although, as you say, there are many hundreds of statues in London, it is very probable that these three were the only ones in that district.
A man who had read deeply about Napoleon, or who had possibly received some hereditary family injury through the great war, might conceivably form such an 'idee fixe' and under its influence be capable of any fantastic outrage.
"That won't do, my dear Watson," said Holmes, shaking his head; "for no amount of 'idee fixe' would enable your interesting monomaniac to find out where these busts were situated."
I don't attempt to do so. I would only observe that there is a certain method in the gentleman's eccentric proceedings.
The affair seems absurdly trifling, and yet I dare call nothing trivial when I reflect that some of my most classic cases have had the least promising commencement.
You will remember, Watson, how the dreadful business of the Abernetty family was first brought to my notice by the depth which the parsley had sunk into the butter upon a hot day.
I can't afford, therefore, to smile at your three broken busts, Lestrade, and I shall be very much obliged to you if you will let me hear of any fresh developments of so singular a chain of events.
The development for which my friend had asked came in a quicker and an infinitely more tragic form than he could have imagined.
I was still dressing in my bedroom next morning when there was a tap at the door and Holmes entered, a telegram in his hand.
Don't know--may be anything. But I suspect it is the sequel of the story of the statues. In that case our friend, the image-breaker, has begun operations in another quarter of London.
In half an hour we had reached Pitt Street, a quiet little backwater just beside one of the briskest currents of London life.
No. 131 was one of a row, all flat-chested, respectable, and most unromantic dwellings. As we drove up we found the railings in front of the house lined by a curious crowd.
By George! it's attempted murder at the least. Nothing less will hold the London message-boy. There's a deed of violence indicated in that fellow's round shoulders and outstretched neck.
What's this, Watson? The top steps swilled down and the other ones dry. Footsteps enough, anyhow! Well, well, there's Lestrade at the front window, and we shall soon know all about it.
The official received us with a very grave face and showed us into a sitting-room, where an exceedingly unkempt and agitated elderly man, clad in a flannel dressing-gown, was pacing up and down.
He was introduced to us as the owner of the house--Mr. Horace Harker, of the Central Press Syndicate.
"It's the Napoleon bust business again," said Lestrade. "You seemed interested last night, Mr. Holmes, so I thought perhaps you would be glad to be present now that the affair has taken a very much graver turn."
If I had come in here as a journalist I should have interviewed myself and had two columns in every evening paper.
As it is I am giving away valuable copy by telling my story over and over to a string of different people, and I can make no use of it myself.
However, I've heard your name, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and if you'll only explain this queer business I shall be paid for my trouble in telling you the story.
You can see for yourself that anyone going out through that open window could reach the front doorstep by taking a long stride.
This was clearly what the burglar had done, so I went round and opened the door. Stepping out into the dark I nearly fell over a dead man who was lying there.
I ran back for a light, and there was the poor fellow, a great gash in his throat and the whole place swimming in blood.
He lay on his back, his knees drawn up, and his mouth horribly open. I shall see him in my dreams. I had just time to blow on my police-whistle, and then I must have fainted, for I knew nothing more until I found the policeman standing over me in the hall.
"There's nothing to show who he was," said Lestrade. "You shall see the body at the mortuary, but we have made nothing of it up to now.
He is a tall man, sunburned, very powerful, not more than thirty. He is poorly dressed, and yet does not appear to be a labourer.
A horn-handled clasp knife was lying in a pool of blood beside him. Whether it was the weapon which did the deed, or whether it belonged to the dead man, I do not know.
There was no name on his clothing, and nothing in his pockets save an apple, some string, a shilling map of London, and a photograph.
It was evidently taken by a snap-shot from a small camera. It represented an alert, sharp-featured simian man with thick eyebrows, and a very peculiar projection of the lower part of the face like the muzzle of a baboon.
We had news of it just before you came. It has been found in the front garden of an empty house in Campden House Road.
"Certainly. I must just take one look round." He examined the carpet and the window. "The fellow had either very long legs or was a most active man," said he.
With an area beneath, it was no mean feat to reach that window-ledge and open that window. Getting back was comparatively simple.
"I must try and make something of it," said he, "though I have no doubt that the first editions of the evening papers are out already with full details.
It lay scattered in splintered shards upon the grass. Holmes picked up several of them and examined them carefully.
"We have a long way to go yet," said he. "And yet--and yet--well, we have some suggestive facts to act upon.
The possession of this trifling bust was worth more in the eyes of this strange criminal than a human life.
That is one point. Then there is the singular fact that he did not break it in the house, or immediately outside the house, if to break it was his sole object.
Well, that's likely enough. But I wish to call your attention very particularly to the position of this house in the garden of which the bust was destroyed.
Yes, but there is another empty house farther up the street which he must have passed before he came to this one.
Why did he not break it there, since it is evident that every yard that he carried it increased the risk of someone meeting him?
"By Jove! that's true," said the detective. "Now that I come to think of it, Dr. Barnicot's bust was broken not far from his red lamp.
To remember it--to docket it. We may come on something later which will bear upon it. What steps do you propose to take now, Lestrade?
The most practical way of getting at it, in my opinion, is to identify the dead man. There should be no difficulty about that.
Oh, you must not let me influence you in any way! I suggest that you go on your line and I on mine. We can compare notes afterwards, and each will supplement the other.
Don't I? Well, perhaps I don't. But I am sure that it will interest Mr. Horace Harker and the subscribers of the Central Press Syndicate.
Sherlock Holmes and I walked together to the High Street, where he stopped at the shop of Harding Brothers, whence the bust had been purchased.
A young assistant informed us that Mr. Harding would be absent until after noon, and that he was himself a newcomer who could give us no information.
"Well, well, we can't expect to have it all our own way, Watson," he said, at last. "We must come back in the afternoon if Mr. Harding will not be here until then.
I am, as you have no doubt surmised, endeavouring to trace these busts to their source, in order to find if there is not something peculiar which may account for their remarkable fate.
Let us make for Mr. Morse Hudson, of the Kennington Road, and see if he can throw any light upon the problem.
A drive of an hour brought us to the picture-dealer's establishment. He was a small, stout man with a red face and a peppery manner.
"Yes, sir. On my very counter, sir," said he. "What we pay rates and taxes for I don't know, when any ruffian can come in and break one's goods.
Yes, sir, it was I who sold Dr. Barnicot his two statues. Disgraceful, sir! A Nihilist plot, that's what I make it.
No one but an Anarchist would go about breaking statues. Red republicans, that's what I call 'em. Who did I get the statues from?
I don't see what that has to do with it. Well, if you really want to know, I got them from Gelder and Co., in Church Street, Stepney.
They are a well-known house in the trade, and have been this twenty years. How many had I? Three--two and one are three--two of Dr. Barnicot's and one smashed in broad daylight on my own counter.
Do I know that photograph? No, I don't. Yes, I do, though. Why, it's Beppo. He was a kind of Italian piece-work man, who made himself useful in the shop.
He could carve a bit and gild and frame, and do odd jobs. The fellow left me last week, and I've heard nothing of him since.
No, I don't know where he came from nor where he went to. I have nothing against him while he was here.
"Well, that's all we could reasonably expect to get from Morse Hudson," said Holmes, as we emerged from the shop.
We have this Beppo as a common factor, both in Kennington and in Kensington, so that is worth a ten-mile drive.
Now, Watson, let us make for Gelder and Co., of Stepney, the source and origin of busts. I shall be surprised if we don't get some help down there.
Here, in a broad thoroughfare, once the abode of wealthy City merchants, we found the sculpture works for which we searched.
Outside was a considerable yard full of monumental masonry. Inside was a large room in which fifty workers were carving or moulding.
The manager, a big blond German, received us civilly, and gave a clear answer to all Holmes's questions.
There was no reason why those six should be different to any of the other casts. He could suggest no possible cause why anyone should wish to destroy them--in fact, he laughed at the idea.
The work was usually done by Italians in the room we were in. When finished the busts were put on a table in the passage to dry, and afterwards stored.
But the production of the photograph had a remarkable effect upon the manager. His face flushed with anger, and his brows knotted over his blue Teutonic eyes.
"Ah, the rascal!" he cried. "Yes, indeed, I know him very well. This has always been a respectable establishment, and the only time that we have ever had the police in it was over this very fellow.
It was more than a year ago now. He knifed another Italian in the street, and then he came to the works with the police on his heels, and he was taken here.
Beppo was his name--his second name I never knew. Serve me right for engaging a man with such a face.
The man lived and he got off with a year. I have no doubt he is out now; but he has not dared to show his nose here.
"No, no," cried Holmes, "not a word to the cousin--not a word, I beg you. The matter is very important, and the farther I go with it the more important it seems to grow.
When you referred in your ledger to the sale of those casts I observed that the date was June 3rd of last year.
"I could tell you roughly by the pay-list," the manager answered. "Yes," he continued, after some turning over of pages, "he was paid last on May 20th."
"Thank you," said Holmes. "I don't think that I need intrude upon your time and patience any more." With a last word of caution that he should say nothing as to our researches we turned our faces westward once more.
The afternoon was far advanced before we were able to snatch a hasty luncheon at a restaurant. A news-bill at the entrance announced "Kensington Outrage.
Murder by a Madman," and the contents of the paper showed that Mr. Horace Harker had got his account into print after all.
Two columns were occupied with a highly sensational and flowery rendering of the whole incident. Holmes propped it against the cruet-stand and read it while he ate.
No explanation save mental aberration can cover the facts.' The Press, Watson, is a most valuable institution if you only know how to use it.
And now, if you have quite finished, we will hark back to Kensington and see what the manager of Harding Brothers has to say to the matter.
The founder of that great emporium proved to be a brisk, crisp little person, very dapper and quick, with a clear head and a ready tongue.
Yes, sir, I have already read the account in the evening papers. Mr. Horace Harker is a customer of ours.
We supplied him with the bust some months ago. We ordered three busts of that sort from Gelder and Co., of Stepney.
They are all sold now. To whom? Oh, I dare say by consulting our sales book we could very easily tell you.
Yes, we have the entries here. One to Mr. Harker, you see, and one to Mr. Josiah Brown, of Laburnum Lodge, Laburnum Vale, Chiswick, and one to Mr. Sandeford, of Lower Grove Road, Reading.
No, I have never seen this face which you show me in the photograph. You would hardly forget it, would you, sir, for I've seldom seen an uglier.
Have we any Italians on the staff? Yes, sir, we have several among our workpeople and cleaners. I dare say they might get a peep at that sales book if they wanted to.
There is no particular reason for keeping a watch upon that book. Well, well, it's a very strange business, and I hope that you'll let me know if anything comes of your inquiries.
Holmes had taken several notes during Mr. Harding's evidence, and I could see that he was thoroughly satisfied by the turn which affairs were taking.
He made no remark, however, save that, unless we hurried, we should be late for our appointment with Lestrade.
Sure enough, when we reached Baker Street the detective was already there, and we found him pacing up and down in a fever of impatience.
"We have had a very busy day, and not entirely a wasted one," my friend explained. "We have seen both the retailers and also the wholesale manufacturers.
"The busts!" cried Lestrade. "Well, well, you have your own methods, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and it is not for me to say a word against them, but I think I have done a better day's work than you.
Inspector Hill knew him the moment he caught sight of him. His name is Pietro Venucci, from Naples, and he is one of the greatest cut-throats in London.
He is connected with the Mafia, which, as you know, is a secret political society, enforcing its decrees by murder.
Now you see how the affair begins to clear up. The other fellow is probably an Italian also, and a member of the Mafia.
He has broken the rules in some fashion. Pietro is set upon his track. Probably the photograph we found in his pocket is the man himself, so that he may not knife the wrong person.
He dogs the fellow, he sees him enter a house, he waits outside for him, and in the scuffle he receives his own death-wound.
"Excellent, Lestrade, excellent!" he cried. "But I didn't quite follow your explanation of the destruction of the busts."
The busts! You never can get those busts out of your head. After all, that is nothing; petty larceny, six months at the most.
It is the murder that we are really investigating, and I tell you that I am gathering all the threads into my hands.
Is a very simple one. I shall go down with Hill to the Italian quarter, find the man whose photograph we have got, and arrest him on the charge of murder.
I think not. I fancy we can attain our end in a simpler way. I can't say for certain, because it all depends--well, it all depends upon a factor which is completely outside our control.
But I have great hopes--in fact, the betting is exactly two to one--that if you will come with us to-night I shall be able to help you to lay him by the heels.
And now I think that a few hours' sleep would do us all good, for I do not propose to leave before eleven o'clock, and it is unlikely that we shall be back before morning.
You'll dine with us, Lestrade, and then you are welcome to the sofa until it is time for us to start.
In the meantime, Watson, I should be glad if you would ring for an express messenger, for I have a letter to send, and it is important that it should go at once.
Holmes spent the evening in rummaging among the files of the old daily papers with which one of our lumber-rooms was packed.
When at last he descended it was with triumph in his eyes, but he said nothing to either of us as to the result of his researches.
I was not surprised when Holmes suggested that I should take my revolver with me. He had himself picked up the loaded hunting-crop which was his favourite weapon.
A four-wheeler was at the door at eleven, and in it we drove to a spot at the other side of Hammersmith Bridge.
Here the cabman was directed to wait. A short walk brought us to a secluded road fringed with pleasant houses, each standing in its own grounds.
The wooden fence which separated the grounds from the road threw a dense black shadow upon the inner side, and here it was that we crouched.
"I fear that you'll have a long wait," Holmes whispered. "We may thank our stars that it is not raining.
I don't think we can even venture to smoke to pass the time. However, it's a two to one chance that we get something to pay us for our trouble.
It proved, however, that our vigil was not to be so long as Holmes had led us to fear, and it ended in a very sudden and singular fashion.
In an instant, without the least sound to warn us of his coming, the garden gate swung open, and a lithe, dark figure, as swift and active as an ape, rushed up the garden path.
We saw it whisk past the light thrown from over the door and disappear against the black shadow of the house.
There was a long pause, during which we held our breath, and then a very gentle creaking sound came to our ears.
The window was being opened. The noise ceased, and again there was a long silence. The fellow was making his way into the house.
We saw the sudden flash of a dark lantern inside the room. What he sought was evidently not there, for again we saw the flash through another blind, and then through another.
But before we could move the man had emerged again. As he came out into the glimmering patch of light we saw that he carried something white under his arm.
The man was so intent upon what he was doing that he never heard our steps as we stole across the grass plot.
With the bound of a tiger Holmes was on his back, and an instant later Lestrade and I had him by either wrist and the handcuffs had been fastened.
As we turned him over I saw a hideous, sallow face, with writhing, furious features, glaring up at us, and I knew that it was indeed the man of the photograph whom we had secured.
But it was not our prisoner to whom Holmes was giving his attention. Squatted on the doorstep, he was engaged in most carefully examining that which the man had brought from the house.
It was a bust of Napoleon like the one which we had seen that morning, and it had been broken into similar fragments.
Carefully Holmes held each separate shard to the light, but in no way did it differ from any other shattered piece of plaster.
He had just completed his examination when the hall lights flew up, the door opened, and the owner of the house, a jovial, rotund figure in shirt and trousers, presented himself.
Yes, sir; and you, no doubt, are Mr. Sherlock Holmes? I had the note which you sent by the express messenger, and I did exactly what you told me.
We locked every door on the inside and awaited developments. Well, I'm very glad to see that you have got the rascal.
However, Lestrade was anxious to get his man into safe quarters, so within a few minutes our cab had been summoned and we were all four upon our way to London.
Not a word would our captive say; but he glared at us from the shadow of his matted hair, and once, when my hand seemed within his reach, he snapped at it like a hungry wolf.
We stayed long enough at the police-station to learn that a search of his clothing revealed nothing save a few shillings and a long sheath knife, the handle of which bore copious traces of recent blood.
"That's all right," said Lestrade, as we parted. "Hill knows all these gentry, and he will give a name to him.
You'll find that my theory of the Mafia will work out all right. But I'm sure I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mr. Holmes, for the workmanlike way in which you laid hands upon him.
If ever I permit you to chronicle any more of my little problems, Watson, I foresee that you will enliven your pages by an account of the singular adventure of the Napoleonic busts.
When we met again next evening Lestrade was furnished with much information concerning our prisoner. His name, it appeared, was Beppo, second name unknown.
Yes, sir, I fear that I am a little late; but the trains were awkward. You wrote to me about a bust that is in my possession.
I have your letter here. You said, 'I desire to possess a copy of Devine's Napoleon, and am prepared to pay you ten pounds for the one which is in your possession.'
I was very much surprised at your letter, for I could not imagine how you knew that I owned such a thing.
Of course you must have been surprised, but the explanation is very simple. Mr. Harding, of Harding Brothers, said that they had sold you their last copy, and he gave me your address.
Well, I am an honest man, though not a very rich one. I only gave fifteen shillings for the bust, and I think you ought to know that before I take ten pounds from you.
I am sure the scruple does you honour, Mr. Sandeford. But I have named that price, so I intend to stick to it.
Well, it is very handsome of you, Mr. Holmes. I brought the bust up with me, as you asked me to do. Here it is!
He opened his bag, and at last we saw placed upon our table a complete specimen of that bust which we had already seen more than once in fragments.
You will kindly sign that paper, Mr. Sandeford, in the presence of these witnesses. It is simply to say that you transfer every possible right that you ever had in the bust to me.
I am a methodical man, you see, and you never know what turn events might take afterwards. Thank you, Mr. Sandeford; here is your money, and I wish you a very good evening.
When our visitor had disappeared Sherlock Holmes's movements were such as to rivet our attention. He began by taking a clean white cloth from a drawer and laying it over the table.
Then he placed his newly-acquired bust in the centre of the cloth. Finally, he picked up his hunting-crop and struck Napoleon a sharp blow on the top of the head.
The figure broke into fragments, and Holmes bent eagerly over the shattered remains. Next instant, with a loud shout of triumph, he held up one splinter, in which a round, dark object was fixed like a plum in a pudding.
Lestrade and I sat silent for a moment, and then, with a spontaneous impulse, we both broke out clapping as at the well-wrought crisis of a play.
A flush of colour sprang to Holmes's pale cheeks, and he bowed to us like the master dramatist who receives the homage of his audience.
It was at such moments that for an instant he ceased to be a reasoning machine, and betrayed his human love for admiration and applause.
The same singularly proud and reserved nature which turned away with disdain from popular notoriety was capable of being moved to its depths by spontaneous wonder and praise from a friend.
The main fact is that he HAD the pearl, and at that moment, when it was on his person, he was pursued by the police.
He made for the factory in which he worked, and he knew that he had only a few minutes in which to conceal this enormously valuable prize, which would otherwise be found on him when he was searched.
It was an admirable hiding-place. No one could possibly find it. But Beppo was condemned to a year's imprisonment, and in the meanwhile his six busts were scattered over London.
Beppo did not despair, and he conducted his search with considerable ingenuity and perseverance. Through a cousin who works with Gelder he found out the retail firms who had bought the busts.
He managed to find employment with Morse Hudson, and in that way tracked down three of them. The pearl was not there.
Then, with the help of some Italian EMPLOYEE, he succeeded in finding out where the other three busts had gone.
The first was at Harker's. There he was dogged by his confederate, who held Beppo responsible for the loss of the pearl, and he stabbed him in the scuffle which followed.
As a means of tracing him if he wished to inquire about him from any third person. That was the obvious reason.
Since Harker's bust was one in three the chances were exactly as I told you, two to one against the pearl being inside it.
There remained two busts, and it was obvious that he would go for the London one first. I warned the inmates of the house, so as to avoid a second tragedy, and we went down with the happiest results.
By that time, of course, I knew for certain that it was the Borgia pearl that we were after. The name of the murdered man linked the one event with the other.
There only remained a single bust--the Reading one--and the pearl must be there. I bought it in your presence from the owner--and there it lies.
"Well," said Lestrade, "I've seen you handle a good many cases, Mr. Holmes, but I don't know that I ever knew a more workmanlike one than that.
We're not jealous of you at Scotland Yard. No, sir, we are very proud of you, and if you come down to-morrow there's not a man, from the oldest inspector to the youngest constable, who wouldn't be glad to shake you by the hand.
"Thank you!" said Holmes. "Thank you!" and as he turned away it seemed to me that he was more nearly moved by the softer human emotions than I had ever seen him.
A moment later he was the cold and practical thinker once more. "Put the pearl in the safe, Watson," said he, "and get out the papers of the Conk-Singleton forgery case.
Good-bye, Lestrade. If any little problem comes your way I shall be happy, if I can, to give you a hint or two as to its solution.
It will be obvious that any details which would help the reader to exactly identify the college or the criminal would be injudicious and offensive.
I will endeavour in my statement to avoid such terms as would serve to limit the events to any particular place, or give a clue as to the people concerned.
Here it was that one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance, Mr. Hilton Soames, tutor and lecturer at the College of St. Luke's.
Mr. Soames was a tall, spare man, of a nervous and excitable temperament. I had always known him to be restless in his manner, but on this particular occasion he was in such a state of uncontrollable agitation that it was clear something very unusual had occurred.
I trust, Mr. Holmes, that you can spare me a few hours of your valuable time. We have had a very painful incident at St. Luke's, and really, but for the happy chance of your being in the town, I should have been at a loss what to do.
"I am very busy just now, and I desire no distractions," my friend answered. "I should much prefer that you called in the aid of the police."
Your discretion is as well known as your powers, and you are the one man in the world who can help me.
My friend's temper had not improved since he had been deprived of the congenial surroundings of Baker Street.
Without his scrap-books, his chemicals, and his homely untidiness, he was an uncomfortable man. He shrugged his shoulders in ungracious acquiescence, while our visitor in hurried words and with much excitable gesticulation poured forth his story.
The moment I looked at my table I was aware that someone had rummaged among my papers. The proof was in three long slips.
I had left them all together. Now, I found that one of them was lying on the floor, one was on the side table near the window, and the third was where I had left it.
Bannister was very much upset by the incident. He had nearly fainted when we found that the papers had undoubtedly been tampered with.
I gave him a little brandy and left him collapsed in a chair while I made a most careful examination of the room.
I soon saw that the intruder had left other traces of his presence besides the rumpled papers. On the table in the window were several shreds from a pencil which had been sharpened.
A broken tip of lead was lying there also. Evidently the rascal had copied the paper in a great hurry, had broken his pencil, and had been compelled to put a fresh point to it.
"Excellent!" said Holmes, who was recovering his good-humour as his attention became more engrossed by the case.
This was not all. I have a new writing-table with a fine surface of red leather. I am prepared to swear, and so is Bannister, that it was smooth and unstained.
I am convinced that these marks were left by the man who rifled the papers. There were no footmarks and no other evidence as to his identity.
I was at my wits' ends, when suddenly the happy thought occurred to me that you were in the town, and I came straight round to put the matter into your hands.
"I shall be happy to look into it and to give you such advice as I can," said Holmes, rising and putting on his overcoat.
The case is not entirely devoid of interest. Had anyone visited you in your room after the papers came to you?
Yes; young Daulat Ras, an Indian student who lives on the same stair, came in to ask me some particulars about the examination.
He was very ill, poor fellow. I left him collapsed in the chair. I was in such a hurry to come to you.
Then it amounts to this, Mr. Soames, that unless the Indian student recognised the roll as being proofs, the man who tampered with them came upon them accidentally without knowing that they were there.
"Well," said he, "let us go round. Not one of your cases, Watson--mental, not physical. All right; come if you want to.
The sitting-room of our client opened by a long, low, latticed window on to the ancient lichen-tinted court of the old college.
A Gothic arched door led to a worn stone staircase. On the ground floor was the tutor's room. Above were three students, one on each story.
It was already twilight when we reached the scene of our problem. Holmes halted and looked earnestly at the window.
"He must have entered through the door. There is no opening except the one pane," said our learned guide.
"Dear me!" said Holmes, and he smiled in a singular way as he glanced at our companion. "Well, if there is nothing to be learned here we had best go inside."
The lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his room. We stood at the entrance while Holmes made an examination of the carpet.
"I am afraid there are no signs here," said he. "One could hardly hope for any upon so dry a day. Your servant seems to have quite recovered.
I see. Near this little table. You can come in now. I have finished with the carpet. Let us take the little table first.
Of course, what has happened is very clear. The man entered and took the papers, sheet by sheet, from the central table.
He carried them over to the window table, because from there he could see if you came across the courtyard, and so could effect an escape.
Ah, that's good! Well, anyhow, that was in his mind. Let me see the three strips. No finger impressions--no!
Well, he carried over this one first and he copied it. How long would it take him to do that, using every possible contraction?
Well, he wrote so furiously that he broke his pencil, and had, as you observe, to sharpen it again. This is of interest, Watson.
Look for such a pencil, Mr. Soames, and you have got your man. When I add that he possesses a large and very blunt knife, you have an additional aid.
Mr. Soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information. "I can follow the other points," said he, "but really, in this matter of the length----"
Watson, I have always done you an injustice. There are others. What could this NN be? It is at the end of a word.
You are aware that Johann Faber is the most common maker's name. Is it not clear that there is just as much of the pencil left as usually follows the Johann?
He held the small table sideways to the electric light. "I was hoping that if the paper on which he wrote was thin some trace of it might come through upon this polished surface.
No, I see nothing. I don't think there is anything more to be learned here. Now for the central table.
This small pellet is, I presume, the black, doughy mass you spoke of. Roughly pyramidal in shape and hollowed out, I perceive.
As you say, there appear to be grains of sawdust in it. Dear me, this is very interesting. And the cut--a positive tear, I see.
It began with a thin scratch and ended in a jagged hole. I am much indebted to you for directing my attention to this case, Mr. Soames.
I should like to have a glance round. What a charming, old-fashioned room! Perhaps you will kindly wait a minute until I have examined the floor.
As Holmes drew the curtain I was aware, from some little rigidity and alertness of his attitude, that he was prepared for an emergency.
As a matter of fact the drawn curtain disclosed nothing but three or four suits of clothes hanging from a line of pegs.
It was a small pyramid of black, putty-like stuff, exactly like the one upon the table of the study. Holmes held it out on his open palm in the glare of the electric light.
I think it is clear enough. You came back by an unexpected way, and so he had no warning until you were at the very door.
What could he do? He caught up everything which would betray him and he rushed into your bedroom to conceal himself.
Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, do you mean to tell me that all the time I was talking to Bannister in this room we had the man prisoner if we had only known it?
Surely there is another alternative, Mr. Holmes. I don't know whether you observed my bedroom window?
Lattice-paned, lead framework, three separate windows, one swinging on hinge and large enough to admit a man.
Exactly. And it looks out on an angle of the courtyard so as to be partly invisible. The man might have effected his entrance there, left traces as he passed through the bedroom, and, finally, finding the door open have escaped that way.
"Let us be practical," said he. "I understand you to say that there are three students who use this stair and are in the habit of passing your door?"
"It is a very delicate question," said he. "One hardly likes to throw suspicion where there are no proofs."
The top floor belongs to Miles McLaren. He is a brilliant fellow when he chooses to work--one of the brightest intellects of the University, but he is wayward, dissipated, and unprincipled.
He was nearly expelled over a card scandal in his first year. He has been idling all this term, and he must look forward with dread to the examination.
He was a little, white-faced, clean-shaven, grizzly-haired fellow of fifty. He was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of the quiet routine of his life.
Was it not very extraordinary that you should do this on the very day when there were these papers inside?
Yes, sir. Such a thing has never happened during the many years that I have been here. I nearly fainted, sir.
That is singular, because you sat down in that chair over yonder near the corner. Why did you pass these other chairs?
Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. I don't believe there is any gentleman in this University who is capable of profiting by such an action.
"Thank you; that will do," said Holmes. "Oh, one more word. You have not mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you attend that anything is amiss?"
"Your three birds are all in their nests," said Holmes, looking up. "Halloa! What's that? One of them seems restless enough."
It was the Indian, whose dark silhouette appeared suddenly upon his blind. He was pacing swiftly up and down his room.
"No difficulty in the world," Soames answered. "This set of rooms is quite the oldest in the college, and it is not unusual for visitors to go over them.
"No names, please!" said Holmes, as we knocked at Gilchrist's door. A tall, flaxen-haired, slim young fellow opened it, and made us welcome when he understood our errand.
I could not see that in either case Holmes had come upon the clue for which he was searching. Only at the third did our visit prove abortive.
The outer door would not open to our knock, and nothing more substantial than a torrent of bad language came from behind it.
"I don't care who you are. You can go to blazes!" roared the angry voice. "To-morrow's the exam, and I won't be drawn by anyone."
"A rude fellow," said our guide, flushing with anger as we withdrew down the stair. "Of course, he did not realize that it was I who was knocking, but none the less his conduct was very uncourteous, and, indeed, under the circumstances rather suspicious."
Really, Mr. Holmes, I cannot undertake to say. He is taller than the Indian, not so tall as Gilchrist.
Our guide cried aloud in his astonishment and dismay. "Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, you are surely not going to leave me in this abrupt fashion!
You don't seem to realize the position. To-morrow is the examination. I must take some definite action to-night.
I cannot allow the examination to be held if one of the papers has been tampered with. The situation must be faced.
You must leave it as it is. I shall drop round early to-morrow morning and chat the matter over. It is possible that I may be in a position then to indicate some course of action.
You can be perfectly easy in your mind. We shall certainly find some way out of your difficulties. I will take the black clay with me, also the pencil cuttings.
When we were out in the darkness of the quadrangle we again looked up at the windows. The Indian still paced his room.
"Well, Watson, what do you think of it?" Holmes asked, as we came out into the main street. "Quite a little parlour game--sort of three-card trick, is it not?
The foul-mouthed fellow at the top. He is the one with the worst record. And yet that Indian was a sly fellow also.
So would you if a flock of strangers came in on you when you were preparing for an examination next day, and every moment was of value.
No, I see nothing in that. Pencils, too, and knives--all was satisfactory. But that fellow DOES puzzle me.
So he did me. That's the puzzling part. Why should a perfectly honest man--well, well, here's a large stationer's.
There were only four stationers of any consequence in the town, and at each Holmes produced his pencil chips and bid high for a duplicate.
All were agreed that one could be ordered, but that it was not a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in stock.
My friend did not appear to be depressed by his failure, but shrugged his shoulders in half-humorous resignation.
No good, my dear Watson. This, the best and only final clue, has run to nothing. But, indeed, I have little doubt that we can build up a sufficient case without it.
By Jove! my dear fellow, it is nearly nine, and the landlady babbled of green peas at seven-thirty. What with your eternal tobacco, Watson, and your irregularity at meals, I expect that you will get notice to quit and that I shall share your downfall--not, however, before we have solved the problem of the nervous tutor, the careless servant, and the three enterprising students.
Holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day, though he sat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner.
Aha! It is not for nothing that I have turned myself out of bed at the untimely hour of six. I have put in two hours' hard work and covered at least five miles, with something to show for it.
And one more this morning. It is a fair argument that wherever No. 3 came from is also the source of Nos.
The unfortunate tutor was certainly in a state of pitiable agitation when we found him in his chambers.
In a few hours the examination would commence, and he was still in the dilemma between making the facts public and allowing the culprit to compete for the valuable scholarship.
He could hardly stand still, so great was his mental agitation, and he ran towards Holmes with two eager hands outstretched.
Thank Heaven that you have come! I feared that you had given it up in despair. What am I to do? Shall the examination proceed?
I think so. If this matter is not to become public we must give ourselves certain powers, and resolve ourselves into a small private court-martial.
You there, if you please, Soames! Watson, you here! I'll take the arm-chair in the middle. I think that we are now sufficiently imposing to strike terror into a guilty breast.
"You will kindly close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Bannister, will you please tell us the truth about yesterday's incident?"
Well, then, I must make some suggestions to you. When you sat down on that chair yesterday, did you do so in order to conceal some object which would have shown who had been in the room?
"It is only a suggestion," said Holmes, suavely. "I frankly admit that I am unable to prove it. But it seems probable enough, since the moment that Mr. Soames's back was turned you released the man who was hiding in that bedroom."
Ah, that's a pity, Bannister. Up to now you may have spoken the truth, but now I know that you have lied.
In that case you can give us no further information. Would you please remain in the room? Stand over there near the bedroom door.
Now, Soames, I am going to ask you to have the great kindness to go up to the room of young Gilchrist, and to ask him to step down into yours.
An instant later the tutor returned, bringing with him the student. He was a fine figure of a man, tall, lithe, and agile, with a springy step and a pleasant, open face.
His troubled blue eyes glanced at each of us, and finally rested with an expression of blank dismay upon Bannister in the farther corner.
"Just close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Mr. Gilchrist, we are all quite alone here, and no one need ever know one word of what passes between us.
We can be perfectly frank with each other. We want to know, Mr. Gilchrist, how you, an honourable man, ever came to commit such an action as that of yesterday?
"No, but you have now," said Holmes. "Now, sir, you must see that after Bannister's words your position is hopeless, and that your only chance lies in a frank confession."
For a moment Gilchrist, with upraised hand, tried to control his writhing features. The next he had thrown himself on his knees beside the table and, burying his face in his hands, he had burst into a storm of passionate sobbing.
Well, when he saw that they were indeed the proofs, it was then that he yielded to temptation. He put his shoes on the table.
Holmes looked triumphantly at Bannister. "He put his gloves on the chair, and he took the proofs, sheet by sheet, to copy them.
He thought the tutor must return by the main gate, and that he would see him. As we know, he came back by the side gate.
Suddenly he heard him at the very door. There was no possible escape. He forgot his gloves, but he caught up his shoes and darted into the bedroom.
You observe that the scratch on that table is slight at one side, but deepens in the direction of the bedroom door.
That in itself is enough to show us that the shoe had been drawn in that direction and that the culprit had taken refuge there.
The earth round the spike had been left on the table, and a second sample was loosened and fell in the bedroom.
Yes, sir, I have, but the shock of this disgraceful exposure has bewildered me. I have a letter here, Mr. Soames, which I wrote to you early this morning in the middle of a restless night.
It was before I knew that my sin had found me out. Here it is, sir. You will see that I have said, 'I have determined not to go in for the examination.
I have been offered a commission in the Rhodesian Police, and I am going out to South Africa at once."'
"I am indeed pleased to hear that you did not intend to profit by your unfair advantage," said Soames.
As to his escaping by that window, it was incredible. Can you not clear up the last point in this mystery, and tell us the reasons for your action?
It was simple enough, sir, if you only had known; but with all your cleverness it was impossible that you could know.
I knew those gloves well, and I understood their message. If Mr. Soames saw them the game was up. I flopped down into that chair, and nothing would budge me until Mr. Soames he went for you.
"No, indeed," said Holmes, heartily, springing to his feet. "Well, Soames, I think we have cleared your little problem up, and our breakfast awaits us at home.
Come, Watson! As to you, sir, I trust that a bright future awaits you in Rhodesia. For once you have fallen low.
As I turn over the pages I see my notes upon the repulsive story of the red leech and the terrible death of Crosby the banker.
Here also I find an account of the Addleton tragedy and the singular contents of the ancient British barrow.
Each of these would furnish a narrative, but on the whole I am of opinion that none of them unite so many singular points of interest as the episode of Yoxley Old Place, which includes not only the lamentable death of young Willoughby Smith, but also those subsequent developments which threw so curious a light upon the causes of the crime.
I walked to the window and looked out on the deserted street. The occasional lamps gleamed on the expanse of muddy road and shining pavement.
"Well, Watson, it's as well we have not to turn out to-night," said Holmes, laying aside his lens and rolling up the palimpsest.
I've done enough for one sitting. It is trying work for the eyes. So far as I can make out it is nothing more exciting than an Abbey's accounts dating from the second half of the fifteenth century.
Amid the droning of the wind there had come the stamping of a horse's hoofs and the long grind of a wheel as it rasped against the kerb.
Want! He wants us. And we, my poor Watson, want overcoats and cravats and goloshes, and every aid that man ever invented to fight the weather.
Wait a bit, though! There's the cab off again! There's hope yet. He'd have kept it if he had wanted us to come.
When the light of the hall lamp fell upon our midnight visitor I had no difficulty in recognising him.
It was young Stanley Hopkins, a promising detective, in whose career Holmes had several times shown a very practical interest.
"Come up, my dear sir," said Holmes's voice from above. "I hope you have no designs upon us on such a night as this."
The detective mounted the stairs, and our lamp gleamed upon his shining waterproof. I helped him out of it while Holmes knocked a blaze out of the logs in the grate.
"Now, my dear Hopkins, draw up and warm your toes," said he. "Here's a cigar, and the doctor has a prescription containing hot water and a lemon which is good medicine on a night like this.
It is indeed, Mr. Holmes. I've had a bustling afternoon, I promise you. Did you see anything of the Yoxley case in the latest editions?
Well, it was only a paragraph, and all wrong at that, so you have not missed anything. I haven't let the grass grow under my feet.
It's down in Kent, seven miles from Chatham and three from the railway line. I was wired for at three-fifteen, reached Yoxley Old Place at five, conducted my investigation, was back at Charing Cross by the last train, and straight to you by cab.
It means that I can make neither head nor tail of it. So far as I can see it is just as tangled a business as ever I handled, and yet at first it seemed so simple that one couldn't go wrong.
There's no motive, Mr. Holmes. That's what bothers me--I can't put my hand on a motive. Here's a man dead--there's no denying that--but, so far as I can see, no reason on earth why anyone should wish him harm.
"I've got my facts pretty clear," said Stanley Hopkins. "All I want now is to know what they all mean.
The story, so far as I can make it out, is like this. Some years ago this country house, Yoxley Old Place, was taken by an elderly man, who gave the name of Professor Coram.
He was an invalid, keeping his bed half the time, and the other half hobbling round the house with a stick or being pushed about the grounds by the gardener in a bath-chair.
He was well liked by the few neighbours who called upon him, and he has the reputation down there of being a very learned man.
His household used to consist of an elderly housekeeper, Mrs. Marker, and of a maid, Susan Tarlton. These have both been with him since his arrival, and they seem to be women of excellent character.
The Professor is writing a learned book, and he found it necessary about a year ago to engage a secretary.
The first two that he tried were not successes; but the third, Mr. Willoughby Smith, a very young man straight from the University, seems to have been just what his employer wanted.
His work consisted in writing all the morning to the Professor's dictation, and he usually spent the evening in hunting up references and passages which bore upon the next day's work.
This Willoughby Smith has nothing against him either as a boy at Uppingham or as a young man at Cambridge.
I have seen his testimonials, and from the first he was a decent, quiet, hardworking fellow, with no weak spot in him at all.
And yet this is the lad who has met his death this morning in the Professor's study under circumstances which can point only to murder.
The wind howled and screamed at the windows. Holmes and I drew closer to the fire while the young inspector slowly and point by point developed his singular narrative.
In the meantime the housekeeper had also arrived upon the scene, but she was just too late to catch the young man's dying words.
Leaving Susan with the body, she hurried to the Professor's room. He was sitting up in bed horribly agitated, for he had heard enough to convince him that something terrible had occurred.
He believes that Willoughby Smith had not an enemy in the world, and can give no reason for the crime.
His first action was to send Mortimer the gardener for the local police. A little later the chief constable sent for me.
Nothing was moved before I got there, and strict orders were given that no one should walk upon the paths leading to the house.
It was a splendid chance of putting your theories into practice, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. There was really nothing wanting.
"Except Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said my companion, with a somewhat bitter smile. "Well, let us hear about it.
I must ask you first, Mr. Holmes, to glance at this rough plan, which will give you a general idea of the position of the Professor's study and the various points of the case.
He unfolded the rough chart, which I here reproduce, and he laid it across Holmes's knee. I rose, and, standing behind Holmes, I studied it over his shoulder.
My examination showed me that I was dealing with a cautious and expert criminal. No footmarks were to be found on the path.
There could be no question, however, that someone had passed along the grass border which lines the path, and that he had done so in order to avoid leaving a track.
I could not find anything in the nature of a distinct impression, but the grass was trodden down and someone had undoubtedly passed.
It could only have been the murderer, since neither the gardener nor anyone else had been there that morning and the rain had only begun during the night.
"It has been pouring rain and blowing a hurricane ever since," said he. "It will be harder to read now than that palimpsest.
Well, well, it can't be helped. What did you do, Hopkins, after you had made certain that you had made certain of nothing?
I come now to the body of the young man. It was found near the bureau, and just to the left of it, as marked upon that chart.
The stab was on the right side of the neck and from behind forwards, so that it is almost impossible that it could have been self-inflicted.
Exactly. The idea crossed my mind. But we found the knife some feet away from the body, so that seems impossible.
Then, of course, there are the man's own dying words. And, finally, there was this very important piece of evidence which was found clasped in the dead man's right hand.
From his pocket Stanley Hopkins drew a small paper packet. He unfolded it and disclosed a golden pince-nez, with two broken ends of black silk cord dangling from the end of it.
"Willoughby Smith had excellent sight," he added. "There can be no question that this was snatched from the face or the person of the assassin."
Sherlock Holmes took the glasses into his hand and examined them with the utmost attention and interest.
He held them on his nose, endeavoured to read through them, went to the window and stared up the street with them, looked at them most minutely in the full light of the lamp, and finally, with a chuckle, seated himself at the table and wrote a few lines upon a sheet of paper, which he tossed across to Stanley Hopkins.
Wanted, a woman of good address, attired like a lady. She has a remarkably thick nose, with eyes which are set close upon either side of it.
She has a puckered forehead, a peering expression, and probably rounded shoulders. There are indications that she has had recourse to an optician at least twice during the last few months.
As her glasses are of remarkable strength and as opticians are not very numerous, there should be no difficulty in tracing her.
That they belong to a woman I infer from their delicacy, and also, of course, from the last words of the dying man.
You will find that the clips are too wide for your nose, showing that the lady's nose was very broad at the base.
This sort of nose is usually a short and coarse one, but there are a sufficient number of exceptions to prevent me from being dogmatic or from insisting upon this point in my description.
My own face is a narrow one, and yet I find that I cannot get my eyes into the centre, or near the centre, of these glasses.
Therefore the lady's eyes are set very near to the sides of the nose. You will perceive, Watson, that the glasses are concave and of unusual strength.
A lady whose vision has been so extremely contracted all her life is sure to have the physical characteristics of such vision, which are seen in the forehead, the eyelids, and the shoulders.
"Yes," I said, "I can follow each of your arguments. I confess, however, that I am unable to understand how you arrive at the double visit to the optician."
"You will perceive," he said, "that the clips are lined with tiny bands of cork to soften the pressure upon the nose.
One of these is discoloured and worn to some slight extent, but the other is new. Evidently one has fallen off and been replaced.
I should judge that the older of them has not been there more than a few months. They exactly correspond, so I gather that the lady went back to the same establishment for the second.
"By George, it's marvellous!" cried Hopkins, in an ecstasy of admiration. "To think that I had all that evidence in my hand and never knew it!
Nothing, Mr. Holmes. I think that you know as much as I do now--probably more. We have had inquiries made as to any stranger seen on the country roads or at the railway station.
We have heard of none. What beats me is the utter want of all object in the crime. Not a ghost of a motive can anyone suggest.
If it is not asking too much, Mr. Holmes. There's a train from Charing Cross to Chatham at six in the morning, and we should be at Yoxley Old Place between eight and nine.
Then we shall take it. Your case has certainly some features of great interest, and I shall be delighted to look into it.
Well, it's nearly one, and we had best get a few hours' sleep. I dare say you can manage all right on the sofa in front of the fire.
The gale had blown itself out next day, but it was a bitter morning when we started upon our journey.
Well, it's only a reasonable walk to Chatham. Anyone might stay there, or take a train without being observed.
This is the garden path of which I spoke, Mr. Holmes. I'll pledge my word there was no mark on it yesterday.
This side, sir. This narrow margin of grass between the path and the flower-bed. I can't see the traces now, but they were clear to me then.
"Yes, yes; someone has passed along," said Holmes, stooping over the grass border. "Our lady must have picked her steps carefully, must she not, since on the one side she would leave a track on the path, and on the other an even clearer one on the soft bed?"
Hum! It was a very remarkable performance--very remarkable. Well, I think we have exhausted the path.
Let us go farther. This garden door is usually kept open, I suppose? Then this visitor had nothing to do but to walk in.
The idea of murder was not in her mind, or she would have provided herself with some sort of weapon, instead of having to pick this knife off the writing-table.
She advanced along this corridor, leaving no traces upon the cocoanut matting. Then she found herself in this study.
Not more than a few minutes, sir. I forgot to tell you that Mrs. Marker, the housekeeper, had been in there tidying not very long before--about a quarter of an hour, she says.
Well, that gives us a limit. Our lady enters this room and what does she do? She goes over to the writing-table.
What for? Not for anything in the drawers. If there had been anything worth her taking it would surely have been locked up.
No; it was for something in that wooden bureau. Halloa! what is that scratch upon the face of it? Just hold a match, Watson.
The mark which he was examining began upon the brass work on the right-hand side of the keyhole, and extended for about four inches, where it had scratched the varnish from the surface.
This is recent, quite recent. See how the brass shines where it is cut. An old scratch would be the same colour as the surface.
Look at it through my lens. There's the varnish, too, like earth on each side of a furrow. Is Mrs. Marker there?
I am sure you did not, for a duster would have swept away these shreds of varnish. Who has the key of this bureau?
Very good. Mrs. Marker, you can go. Now we are making a little progress. Our lady enters the room, advances to the bureau, and either opens it or tries to do so.
While she is thus engaged young Willoughby Smith enters the room. In her hurry to withdraw the key she makes this scratch upon the door.
He seizes her, and she, snatching up the nearest object, which happens to be this knife, strikes at him in order to make him let go his hold.
The blow is a fatal one. He falls and she escapes, either with or without the object for which she has come.
Is Susan the maid there? Could anyone have got away through that door after the time that you heard the cry, Susan?
No sir; it is impossible. Before I got down the stair I'd have seen anyone in the passage. Besides, the door never opened, for I would have heard it.
That settles this exit. Then no doubt the lady went out the way she came. I understand that this other passage leads only to the Professor's room.
We shall go down it and make the acquaintance of the Professor. Halloa, Hopkins! this is very important, very important indeed.
Don't you see any bearing upon the case? Well, well, I don't insist upon it. No doubt I am wrong. And yet it seems to me to be suggestive.
We passed down the passage, which was of the same length as that which led to the garden. At the end was a short flight of steps ending in a door.
It was a very large chamber, lined with innumerable volumes, which had overflowed from the shelves and lay in piles in the corners, or were stacked all round at the base of the cases.
The bed was in the centre of the room, and in it, propped up with pillows, was the owner of the house.
I have seldom seen a more remarkable-looking person. It was a gaunt, aquiline face which was turned towards us, with piercing dark eyes, which lurked in deep hollows under overhung and tufted brows.
His hair and beard were white, save that the latter was curiously stained with yellow around his mouth.
A cigarette glowed amid the tangle of white hair, and the air of the room was fetid with stale tobacco-smoke.
"A smoker, Mr. Holmes?" said he, speaking well-chosen English with a curious little mincing accent. "Pray take a cigarette.
Bad, sir, very bad, but an old man has few pleasures. Tobacco and my work--that is all that is left to me.
"Tobacco and my work, but now only tobacco," the old man exclaimed. "Alas! what a fatal interruption!
Who could have foreseen such a terrible catastrophe? So estimable a young man! I assure you that after a few months' training he was an admirable assistant.
I shall indeed be indebted to you if you can throw a light where all is so dark to us. To a poor bookworm and invalid like myself such a blow is paralyzing.
I seem to have lost the faculty of thought. But you are a man of action--you are a man of affairs. It is part of the everyday routine of your life.
Holmes was pacing up and down one side of the room whilst the old Professor was talking. I observed that he was smoking with extraordinary rapidity.
"Yes, sir, it is a crushing blow," said the old man. "That is my MAGNUM OPUS--the pile of papers on the side table yonder.
It is my analysis of the documents found in the Coptic monasteries of Syria and Egypt, a work which will cut deep at the very foundations of revealed religion.
With my enfeebled health I do not know whether I shall ever be able to complete it now that my assistant has been taken from me.
"I am a connoisseur," said he, taking another cigarette from the box--his fourth--and lighting it from the stub of that which he had finished.
I will not trouble you with any lengthy cross-examination, Professor Coram, since I gather that you were in bed at the time of the crime and could know nothing about it.
I would only ask this. What do you imagine that this poor fellow meant by his last words: 'The Professor--it was she'?
"Susan is a country girl," said he, "and you know the incredible stupidity of that class. I fancy that the poor fellow murmured some incoherent delirious words, and that she twisted them into this meaningless message."
Possibly an accident; possibly--I only breathe it among ourselves--a suicide. Young men have their hidden troubles--some affair of the heart, perhaps, which we have never known.
Ah! I am only a student--a man of dreams. I cannot explain the practical things of life. But still, we are aware, my friend, that love-gages may take strange shapes.
This gentleman speaks of footsteps in the grass; but, after all, it is easy to be mistaken on such a point.
As to the knife, it might well be thrown far from the unfortunate man as he fell. It is possible that I speak as a child, but to me it seems that Willoughby Smith has met his fate by his own hand.
Holmes seemed struck by the theory thus put forward, and he continued to walk up and down for some time, lost in thought and consuming cigarette after cigarette.
Nothing that would help a thief. Family papers, letters from my poor wife, diplomas of Universities which have done me honour.
"No; I hardly think that it would help me," said he. "I should prefer to go quietly down to your garden and turn the whole matter over in my head.
At two o'clock we will come again and report to you anything which may have happened in the interval.
"It depends upon those cigarettes that I smoked," said he. "It is possible that I am utterly mistaken.
Well, well, you may see for yourself. If not, there's no harm done. Of course, we always have the optician clue to fall back upon, but I take a short cut when I can get it.
I may have remarked before that Holmes had, when he liked, a peculiarly ingratiating way with women, and that he very readily established terms of confidence with them.
In half the time which he had named he had captured the housekeeper's goodwill, and was chatting with her as if he had known her for years.
Yes, Mr. Holmes, it is as you say, sir. He does smoke something terrible. All day and sometimes all night, sir.
I've seen that room of a morning--well, sir, you'd have thought it was a London fog. Poor young Mr. Smith, he was a smoker also, but not as bad as the Professor.
I'll wager he took no breakfast this morning, and won't face his lunch after all the cigarettes I saw him consume.
I'm surprised myself, for since I came into that room yesterday and saw young Mr. Smith lying there on the floor I couldn't bear to look at food.
As to my friend, all his usual energy seemed to have deserted him. I had never known him handle a case in such a half-hearted fashion.
I could not myself see the bearing of this incident, but I clearly perceived that Holmes was weaving it into the general scheme which he had formed in his brain.
Suddenly he sprang from his chair and glanced at his watch. "Two o'clock, gentlemen," said he. "We must go up and have it out with our friend the Professor."
The old man had just finished his lunch, and certainly his empty dish bore evidence to the good appetite with which his housekeeper had credited him.
He was, indeed, a weird figure as he turned his white mane and his glowing eyes towards us. The eternal cigarette smouldered in his mouth.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, have you solved this mystery yet?" He shoved the large tin of cigarettes which stood on a table beside him towards my companion.
Holmes stretched out his hand at the same moment, and between them they tipped the box over the edge.
For a minute or two we were all on our knees retrieving stray cigarettes from impossible places. When we rose again I observed that Holmes's eyes were shining and his cheeks tinged with colour.
Stanley Hopkins and I stared in amazement. Something like a sneer quivered over the gaunt features of the old Professor.
You are surely joking, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You compel me to tell you that this is too serious a matter to be treated in such a fashion.
A lady yesterday entered your study. She came with the intention of possessing herself of certain documents which were in your bureau.
She had a key of her own. I have had an opportunity of examining yours, and I do not find that slight discolouration which the scratch made upon the varnish would have produced.
You were not an accessory, therefore, and she came, so far as I can read the evidence, without your knowledge to rob you.
The Professor blew a cloud from his lips. "This is most interesting and instructive," said he. "Have you no more to add?
I will endeavour to do so. In the first place she was seized by your secretary, and stabbed him in order to escape.
This catastrophe I am inclined to regard as an unhappy accident, for I am convinced that the lady had no intention of inflicting so grievous an injury.
An assassin does not come unarmed. Horrified by what she had done she rushed wildly away from the scene of the tragedy.
Unfortunately for her she had lost her glasses in the scuffle, and as she was extremely short-sighted she was really helpless without them.
What was she to do? She could not go back. She could not remain where she was. She must go on. She went on.
The old man sat with his mouth open staring wildly at Holmes. Amazement and fear were stamped upon his expressive features.
"All very fine, Mr. Holmes," said he. "But there is one little flaw in your splendid theory. I was myself in my room, and I never left it during the day."
And you mean to say that I could lie upon that bed and not be aware that a woman had entered my room?
I never said so. You WERE aware of it. You spoke with her. You recognised her. You aided her to escape.
Again the Professor burst into high-keyed laughter. He had risen to his feet and his eyes glowed like embers.
I saw the old man throw up his arms, a terrible convulsion passed over his grim face, and he fell back in his chair.
At the same instant the bookcase at which Holmes pointed swung round upon a hinge, and a woman rushed out into the room.
She was brown with the dust and draped with the cobwebs which had come from the walls of her hiding-place.
What with her natural blindness, and what with the change from dark to light, she stood as one dazed, blinking about her to see where and who we were.
Stanley Hopkins had laid his hand upon her arm and claimed her as his prisoner, but she waved him aside gently, and yet with an overmastering dignity which compelled obedience.
"Yes, sir, I am your prisoner," she said. "From where I stood I could hear everything, and I know that you have learned the truth.
I confess it all. It was I who killed the young man. But you are right, you who say it was an accident.
I did not even know that it was a knife which I held in my hand, for in my despair I snatched anything from the table and struck at him to make him let me go.
She had turned a dreadful colour, the more ghastly under the dark dust-streaks upon her face. She seated herself on the side of the bed; then she resumed.
"I have only a little time here," she said, "but I would have you to know the whole truth. I am this man's wife.
I have said, gentlemen, that I am this man's wife. He was fifty and I a foolish girl of twenty when we married.
Yes, we were all arrested upon his confession. Some of us found our way to the gallows and some to Siberia.
I was among these last, but my term was not for life. My husband came to England with his ill-gotten gains, and has lived in quiet ever since, knowing well that if the Brotherhood knew where he was not a week would pass before justice would be done.
The old man reached out a trembling hand and helped himself to a cigarette. "I am in your hands, Anna," said he.
"I have not yet told you the height of his villainy," said she. "Among our comrades of the Order there was one who was the friend of my heart.
He was noble, unselfish, loving--all that my husband was not. He hated violence. We were all guilty--if that is guilt--but he was not.
My husband found and kept both diary and letters. He hid them, and he tried hard to swear away the young man's life.
In this he failed, but Alexis was sent a convict to Siberia, where now, at this moment, he works in a salt mine.
Think of that, you villain, you villain; now, now, at this very moment, Alexis, a man whose name you are not worthy to speak, works and lives like a slave, and yet I have your life in my hands and I let you go.
I had just taken the papers and was locking the cupboard when the young man seized me. I had seen him already that morning.
He had met me in the road and I had asked him to tell me where Professor Coram lived, not knowing that he was in his employ.
"Exactly! exactly!" said Holmes. "The secretary came back and told his employer of the woman he had met.
Then in his last breath he tried to send a message that it was she--the she whom he had just discussed with him.
"You must let me speak," said the woman, in an imperative voice, and her face contracted as if in pain.
When he had fallen I rushed from the room, chose the wrong door, and found myself in my husband's room.
He spoke of giving me up. I showed him that if he did so his life was in my hands. If he gave me to the law I could give him to the Brotherhood.
It was not that I wished to live for my own sake, but it was that I desired to accomplish my purpose.
He knew that I would do what I said--that his own fate was involved in mine. For that reason and for no other he shielded me.
He thrust me into that dark hiding-place, a relic of old days, known only to himself. He took his meals in his own room, and so was able to give me part of his food.
It was agreed that when the police left the house I should slip away by night and come back no more. But in some way you have read our plans.
She tore from the bosom of her dress a small packet. "These are my last words," said she; "here is the packet which will save Alexis.
I confide it to your honour and to your love of justice. Take it! You will deliver it at the Russian Embassy.
"Stop her!" cried Holmes. He had bounded across the room and had wrenched a small phial from her hand.
"Too late!" she said, sinking back on the bed. "Too late! I took the poison before I left my hiding-place.
"A simple case, and yet in some ways an instructive one," Holmes remarked, as we travelled back to town.
It hinged from the outset upon the pince-nez. But for the fortunate chance of the dying man having seized these I am not sure that we could ever have reached our solution.
It was clear to me from the strength of the glasses that the wearer must have been very blind and helpless when deprived of them.
When you asked me to believe that she walked along a narrow strip of grass without once making a false step I remarked, as you may remember, that it was a noteworthy performance.
In my mind I set it down as an impossible performance, save in the unlikely case that she had a second pair of glasses.
I was forced, therefore, to seriously consider the hypothesis that she had remained within the house.
On perceiving the similarity of the two corridors it became clear that she might very easily have made such a mistake, and in that case it was evident that she must have entered the Professor's room.
I was keenly on the alert, therefore, for whatever would bear out this supposition, and I examined the room narrowly for anything in the shape of a hiding-place.
The carpet seemed continuous and firmly nailed, so I dismissed the idea of a trap-door. There might well be a recess behind the books.
As you are aware, such devices are common in old libraries. I observed that books were piled on the floor at all other points, but that one bookcase was left clear.
This, then, might be the door. I could see no marks to guide me, but the carpet was of a dun colour, which lends itself very well to examination.
I therefore smoked a great number of those excellent cigarettes, and I dropped the ash all over the space in front of the suspected bookcase.
Well, Hopkins, here we are at Charing Cross, and I congratulate you on having brought your case to a successful conclusion.
You are going to head-quarters, no doubt. I think, Watson, you and I will drive together to the Russian Embassy.
Please await me. Terrible misfortune. Right wing three-quarter missing; indispensable to morrow.--OVERTON.
"Strand post-mark and dispatched ten-thirty-six," said Holmes, reading it over and over. "Mr. Overton was evidently considerably excited when he sent it, and somewhat incoherent in consequence.
Well, well, he will be here, I dare say, by the time I have looked through the TIMES, and then we shall know all about it.
For years I had gradually weaned him from that drug mania which had threatened once to check his remarkable career.
Therefore I blessed this Mr. Overton, whoever he might be, since he had come with his enigmatic message to break that dangerous calm which brought more peril to my friend than all the storms of his tempestuous life.
As we had expected, the telegram was soon followed by its sender, and the card of Mr. Cyril Overton, of Trinity College, Cambridge, announced the arrival of an enormous young man, sixteen stone of solid bone and muscle, who spanned the doorway with his broad shoulders and looked from one of us to the other with a comely face which was haggard with anxiety.
I've been down to Scotland Yard, Mr. Holmes. I saw Inspector Stanley Hopkins. He advised me to come to you.
It's awful, Mr. Holmes, simply awful! I wonder my hair isn't grey. Godfrey Staunton--you've heard of him, of course?
He's simply the hinge that the whole team turns on. I'd rather spare two from the pack and have Godfrey for my three-quarter line.
Whether it's passing, or tackling, or dribbling, there's no one to touch him; and then, he's got the head and can hold us all together.
He's a fine place-kick, it's true, but, then, he has no judgment, and he can't sprint for nuts. Why, Morton or Johnson, the Oxford fliers, could romp round him.
Stevenson is fast enough, but he couldn't drop from the twenty-five line, and a three-quarter who can't either punt or drop isn't worth a place for pace alone.
When our visitor was silent Holmes stretched out his hand and took down letter "S" of his commonplace book.
"There is Arthur H. Staunton, the rising young forger," said he, "and there was Henry Staunton, whom I helped to hang, but Godfrey Staunton is a new name to me."
"Why, Mr. Holmes, I thought you knew things," said he. "I suppose, then, if you have never heard of Godfrey Staunton you don't know Cyril Overton either?"
"Great Scot!" cried the athlete. "Why, I was first reserve for England against Wales, and I've skippered the 'Varsity all this year.
But that's nothing! I didn't think there was a soul in England who didn't know Godfrey Staunton, the crack three-quarter, Cambridge, Blackheath, and five Internationals.
However, your unexpected visit this morning shows me that even in that world of fresh air and fair play there may be work for me to do; so now, my good sir, I beg you to sit down and to tell me slowly and quietly exactly what it is that has occurred, and how you desire that I should help you.
Young Overton's face assumed the bothered look of the man who is more accustomed to using his muscles than his wits; but by degrees, with many repetitions and obscurities which I may omit from his narrative, he laid his strange story before us.
It's this way, Mr. Holmes. As I have said, I am the skipper of the Rugger team of Cambridge 'Varsity, and Godfrey Staunton is my best man.
I had a word or two with Godfrey before he turned in. He seemed to me to be pale and bothered. I asked him what was the matter.
He said he was all right--just a touch of headache. I bade him good-night and left him. Half an hour later the porter tells me that a rough-looking man with a beard called with a note for Godfrey.
He had not gone to bed and the note was taken to his room. Godfrey read it and fell back in a chair as if he had been pole-axed.
The porter was so scared that he was going to fetch me, but Godfrey stopped him, had a drink of water, and pulled himself together.
Then he went downstairs, said a few words to the man who was waiting in the hall, and the two of them went off together.
The last that the porter saw of them, they were almost running down the street in the direction of the Strand.
This morning Godfrey's room was empty, his bed had never been slept in, and his things were all just as I had seen them the night before.
He had gone off at a moment's notice with this stranger, and no word has come from him since. I don't believe he will ever come back.
He was a sportsman, was Godfrey, down to his marrow, and he wouldn't have stopped his training and let in his skipper if it were not for some cause that was too strong for him.
I wired to Cambridge to learn if anything had been heard of him there. I have had an answer. No one has seen him.
Indeed. This throws new light upon the matter. Lord Mount-James is one of the richest men in England.
Yes, he was his heir, and the old boy is nearly eighty--cram full of gout, too. They say he could chalk his billiard-cue with his knuckles.
He never allowed Godfrey a shilling in his life, for he is an absolute miser, but it will all come to him right enough.
Well, we can soon determine that. If your friend was going to his relative, Lord Mount-James, you have then to explain the visit of this rough-looking fellow at so late an hour, and the agitation that was caused by his coming.
It must, as you say, have been an overpowering necessity which tore him away in such a fashion, and the same necessity is likely to hold him away.
Let us step round together to this hotel, and see if the porter can throw any fresh light upon the matter.
He seemed himself to be agitated. The porter had observed his hand trembling when he had held out the note.
Godfrey Staunton had crammed the note into his pocket. Staunton had not shaken hands with the man in the hall.
They had exchanged a few sentences, of which the porter had only distinguished the one word "time." Then they had hurried off in the manner described.
Yes, sir. I was standing by the door, and he with his back turned at that table. When he had written it he said, 'All right, porter, I will take this myself.'
Holmes rose. Taking the forms he carried them over to the window and carefully examined that which was uppermost.
"It is a pity he did not write in pencil," said he, throwing them down again with a shrug of disappointment.
As you have no doubt frequently observed, Watson, the impression usually goes through--a fact which has dissolved many a happy marriage.
However, I can find no trace here. I rejoice, however, to perceive that he wrote with a broad-pointed quill pen, and I can hardly doubt that we will find some impression upon this blotting-pad.
"That is unnecessary," said Holmes. "The paper is thin, and the reverse will give the message. Here it is."
So that is the tail end of the telegram which Godfrey Staunton dispatched within a few hours of his disappearance.
There are at least six words of the message which have escaped us; but what remains--'Stand by us for God's sake!'
'US,' mark you! Another person was involved. Who should it be but the pale-faced, bearded man, who seemed himself in so nervous a state?
What, then, is the connection between Godfrey Staunton and the bearded man? And what is the third source from which each of them sought for help against pressing danger?
There is so much red tape in these matters! However, I have no doubt that with a little delicacy and finesse the end may be attained.
Meanwhile, I should like in your presence, Mr. Overton, to go through these papers which have been left upon the table.
There were a number of letters, bills, and note-books, which Holmes turned over and examined with quick, nervous fingers and darting, penetrating eyes.
"Nothing here," he said, at last. "By the way, I suppose your friend was a healthy young fellow--nothing amiss with him?"
Perhaps he was not so strong as you suppose. I should think he may have had some secret trouble. With your assent I will put one or two of these papers in my pocket, in case they should bear upon our future inquiry.
"One moment! one moment!" cried a querulous voice, and we looked up to find a queer little old man, jerking and twitching in the doorway.
He was dressed in rusty black, with a very broad brimmed top-hat and a loose white necktie--the whole effect being that of a very rustic parson or of an undertaker's mute.
Yet, in spite of his shabby and even absurd appearance, his voice had a sharp crackle, and his manner a quick intensity which commanded attention.
Then it is you who sent me a telegram. My name is Lord Mount-James. I came round as quickly as the Bayswater 'bus would bring me.
"Nothing of the sort, sir!" screamed the little man. "Don't look to me for a penny--not a penny! You understand that, Mr. Detective!
As to those papers with which you are making so free, I may tell you that in case there should be anything of any value among them you will be held strictly to account for what you do with them.
"Very good, sir," said Sherlock Holmes. "May I ask in the meanwhile whether you have yourself any theory to account for this young man's disappearance?"
No, sir, I have not. He is big enough and old enough to look after himself, and if he is so foolish as to lose himself I entirely refuse to accept the responsibility of hunting for him.
"I quite understand your position," said Holmes, with a mischievous twinkle in his eyes. "Perhaps you don't quite understand mine.
Godfrey Staunton appears to have been a poor man. If he has been kidnapped it could not have been for anything which he himself possesses.
The fame of your wealth has gone abroad, Lord Mount-James, and it is entirely possible that a gang of thieves have secured your nephew in order to gain from him some information as to your house, your habits, and your treasure.
Heavens, sir, what an idea! I never thought of such villainy! What inhuman rogues there are in the world!
But Godfrey is a fine lad--a staunch lad. Nothing would induce him to give his old uncle away. I'll have the plate moved over to the bank this evening.
In the meantime spare no pains, Mr. Detective! I beg you to leave no stone unturned to bring him safely back.
Even in his chastened frame of mind the noble miser could give us no information which could help us, for he knew little of the private life of his nephew.
Our only clue lay in the truncated telegram, and with a copy of this in his hand Holmes set forth to find a second link for his chain.
We had shaken off Lord Mount-James, and Overton had gone to consult with the other members of his team over the misfortune which had befallen them.
"It's worth trying, Watson," said Holmes. "Of course, with a warrant we could demand to see the counterfoils, but we have not reached that stage yet.
"I am sorry to trouble you," said he, in his blandest manner, to the young woman behind the grating; "there is some small mistake about a telegram I sent yesterday.
I have had no answer, and I very much fear that I must have omitted to put my name at the end. Could you tell me if this was so?
Holmes put his finger to his lips and glanced at me. "The last words in it were 'for God's sake,'" he whispered, confidentially; "I am very anxious at getting no answer."
"Then that, of course, accounts for my getting no answer," said Holmes. "Dear me, how very stupid of me, to be sure!
Good morning, miss, and many thanks for having relieved my mind." He chuckled and rubbed his hands when we found ourselves in the street once more.
We progress, my dear Watson, we progress. I had seven different schemes for getting a glimpse of that telegram, but I could hardly hope to succeed the very first time.
Yes; I think we must run down to Cambridge together. All the indications seem to me to point in that direction.
"Tell me," I asked, as we rattled up Gray's Inn Road, "have you any suspicion yet as to the cause of the disappearance?
I don't think that among all our cases I have known one where the motives are more obscure. Surely you don't really imagine that he may be kidnapped in order to give information against his wealthy uncle?
I confess, my dear Watson, that that does not appeal to me as a very probable explanation. It struck me, however, as being the one which was most likely to interest that exceedingly unpleasant old person.
There is one explanation. A second very obvious one is that this young man really is the heir of a great property, however modest his means may at present be, and it is not impossible that a plot to hold him for ransom might be concocted.
Quite true, Watson. The telegram still remains the only solid thing with which we have to deal, and we must not permit our attention to wander away from it.
It is to gain light upon the purpose of this telegram that we are now upon our way to Cambridge. The path of our investigation is at present obscure, but I shall be very much surprised if before evening we have not cleared it up or made a considerable advance along it.
It was already dark when we reached the old University city. Holmes took a cab at the station, and ordered the man to drive to the house of Dr. Leslie Armstrong.
A few minutes later we had stopped at a large mansion in the busiest thoroughfare. We were shown in, and after a long wait were at last admitted into the consulting-room, where we found the doctor seated behind his table.
It argues the degree in which I had lost touch with my profession that the name of Leslie Armstrong was unknown to me.
Now I am aware that he is not only one of the heads of the medical school of the University, but a thinker of European reputation in more than one branch of science.
A man of deep character, a man with an alert mind, grim, ascetic, self-contained, formidable--so I read Dr. Leslie Armstrong.
He held my friend's card in his hand, and he looked up with no very pleased expression upon his dour features.
I have heard your name, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and I am aware of your profession, one of which I by no means approve.
"In that, doctor, you will find yourself in agreement with every criminal in the country," said my friend, quietly.
You may look upon me simply as an irregular pioneer who goes in front of the regular forces of the country.
I have no sympathy with these childish games. The young man's fate interests me deeply, since I know him and like him.
Holmes replaced the bill in his note-book. "If you prefer a public explanation it must come sooner or later," said he.
I have already told you that I can hush up that which others will be bound to publish, and you would really be wiser to take me into your complete confidence.
"I'll trouble you to walk out of my house, sir," said he. "You can tell your employer, Lord Mount-James, that I do not wish to have anything to do either with him or with his agents.
No, sir, not another word!" He rang the bell furiously. "John, show these gentlemen out!" A pompous butler ushered us severely to the door, and we found ourselves in the street.
And now, my poor Watson, here we are, stranded and friendless in this inhospitable town, which we cannot leave without abandoning our case.
This little inn just opposite Armstrong's house is singularly adapted to our needs. If you would engage a front room and purchase the necessaries for the night, I may have time to make a few inquiries.
These few inquiries proved, however, to be a more lengthy proceeding than Holmes had imagined, for he did not return to the inn until nearly nine o'clock.
The sound of carriage wheels caused him to rise and glance out of the window. A brougham and pair of greys under the glare of a gas-lamp stood before the doctor's door.
"It's been out three hours," said Holmes; "started at half-past six, and here it is back again. That gives a radius of ten or twelve miles, and he does it once, or sometimes twice, a day."
But Armstrong is not really a doctor in practice. He is a lecturer and a consultant, but he does not care for general practice, which distracts him from his literary work.
Why, then, does he make these long journeys, which must be exceedingly irksome to him, and who is it that he visits?
Neither dog nor man liked the look of my stick, however, and the matter fell through. Relations were strained after that, and further inquiries out of the question.
All that I have learned I got from a friendly native in the yard of our own inn. It was he who told me of the doctor's habits and of his daily journey.
Excellent, Watson! You are scintillating this evening. The idea did cross my mind. There is, as you may have observed, a bicycle shop next to our inn.
Into this I rushed, engaged a bicycle, and was able to get started before the carriage was quite out of sight.
I rapidly overtook it, and then, keeping at a discreet distance of a hundred yards or so, I followed its lights until we were clear of the town.
There was no sign of it, however, and so it became evident that it had turned down one of several side roads which I had observed.
I rode back, but again saw nothing of the carriage, and now, as you perceive, it has returned after me.
Of course, I had at the outset no particular reason to connect these journeys with the disappearance of Godfrey Staunton, and was only inclined to investigate them on the general grounds that everything which concerns Dr. Armstrong is at present of interest to us; but, now that I find he keeps so keen a look-out upon anyone who may follow him on these excursions, the affair appears more important, and I shall not be satisfied until I have made the matter clear.
Can we? It is not so easy as you seem to think. You are not familiar with Cambridgeshire scenery, are you?
He knows where the young man is--to that I'll swear--and if he knows, then it must be our own fault if we cannot manage to know also.
At present it must be admitted that the odd trick is in his possession, and, as you are aware, Watson, it is not my habit to leave the game in that condition.
And yet the next day brought us no nearer to the solution of the mystery. A note was handed in after breakfast, which Holmes passed across to me with a smile.
"An outspoken, honest antagonist is the doctor," said Holmes. "Well, well, he excites my curiosity, and I must really know more before I leave him."
"His carriage is at his door now," said I. "There he is stepping into it. I saw him glance up at our window as he did so.
No, no, my dear Watson! With all respect for your natural acumen I do not think that you are quite a match for the worthy doctor.
No doubt you will find some sights to amuse you in this venerable city, and I hope to bring back a more favourable report to you before evening.
Once more, however, my friend was destined to be disappointed. He came back at night weary and unsuccessful.
I have covered some ground: Chesterton, Histon, Waterbeach, and Oakington have each been explored and have each proved disappointing.
The daily appearance of a brougham and pair could hardly have been overlooked in such Sleepy Hollows.
Yes; I opened it. Here it is: 'Ask for Pompey from Jeremy Dixon, Trinity College.' I don't understand it.
Oh, it is clear enough. It is from our friend Overton, and is in answer to a question from me. I'll just send round a note to Mr. Jeremy Dixon, and then I have no doubt that our luck will turn.
Yes, the local evening paper has an excellent account in its last edition. Oxford won by a goal and two tries.
The lack of combination in the three-quarter line and their weakness both in attack and defence more than neutralized the efforts of a heavy and hard-working pack.'
"Then our friend Overton's forebodings have been justified," said Holmes. "Personally I am in agreement with Dr. Armstrong, and football does not come within my horizon.
I was horrified by my first glimpse of Holmes next morning, for he sat by the fire holding his tiny hypodermic syringe.
I associated that instrument with the single weakness of his nature, and I feared the worst when I saw it glittering in his hand.
No, no, my dear fellow, there is no cause for alarm. It is not upon this occasion the instrument of evil, but it will rather prove to be the key which will unlock our mystery.
On this syringe I base all my hopes. I have just returned from a small scouting expedition and everything is favourable.
Eat a good breakfast, Watson, for I propose to get upon Dr. Armstrong's trail to-day, and once on it I will not stop for rest or food until I run him to his burrow.
"In that case," said I, "we had best carry our breakfast with us, for he is making an early start. His carriage is at the door."
Never mind. Let him go. He will be clever if he can drive where I cannot follow him. When you have finished come downstairs with me, and I will introduce you to a detective who is a very eminent specialist in the work that lies before us.
When we descended I followed Holmes into the stable yard, where he opened the door of a loose-box and led out a squat, lop-eared, white-and-tan dog, something between a beagle and a foxhound.
"Let me introduce you to Pompey," said he. "Pompey is the pride of the local draghounds, no very great flier, as his build will show, but a staunch hound on a scent.
Well, Pompey, you may not be fast, but I expect you will be too fast for a couple of middle-aged London gentlemen, so I will take the liberty of fastening this leather leash to your collar.
A threadbare and venerable device, but useful upon occasion. I walked into the doctor's yard this morning and shot my syringe full of aniseed over the hind wheel.
A draghound will follow aniseed from here to John o' Groat's, and our friend Armstrong would have to drive through the Cam before he would shake Pompey off his trail.
The road took a sweep to the south of the town and continued in the opposite direction to that in which we started.
"This DETOUR has been entirely for our benefit, then?" said Holmes. "No wonder that my inquiries among those villages led to nothing.
The doctor has certainly played the game for all it is worth, and one would like to know the reason for such elaborate deception.
This should be the village of Trumpington to the right of us. And, by Jove! here is the brougham coming round the corner.
He sprang through a gate into a field, dragging the reluctant Pompey after him. We had hardly got under the shelter of the hedge when the carriage rattled past.
I caught a glimpse of Dr. Armstrong within, his shoulders bowed, his head sunk on his hands, the very image of distress.
"I fear there is some dark ending to our quest," said he. "It cannot be long before we know it. Come, Pompey!
There could be no doubt that we had reached the end of our journey. Pompey ran about and whined eagerly outside the gate where the marks of the brougham's wheels were still to be seen.
A footpath led across to the lonely cottage. Holmes tied the dog to the hedge, and we hastened onwards.
Holmes paused irresolute, and then he glanced back at the road which we had just traversed. A brougham was coming down it, and there could be no mistaking those grey horses.
"By Jove, the doctor is coming back!" cried Holmes. "That settles it. We are bound to see what it means before he comes."
He opened the door and we stepped into the hall. The droning sound swelled louder upon our ears until it became one long, deep wail of distress.
It came from upstairs. Holmes darted up and I followed him. He pushed open a half-closed door and we both stood appalled at the sight before us.
A woman, young and beautiful, was lying dead upon the bed. Her calm, pale face, with dim, wide-opened blue eyes, looked upward from amid a great tangle of golden hair.
At the foot of the bed, half sitting, half kneeling, his face buried in the clothes, was a young man, whose frame was racked by his sobs.
So absorbed was he by his bitter grief that he never looked up until Holmes's hand was on his shoulder.
The man was so dazed that he could not be made to understand that we were anything but doctors who had been sent to his assistance.
Holmes was endeavouring to utter a few words of consolation, and to explain the alarm which had been caused to his friends by his sudden disappearance, when there was a step upon the stairs, and there was the heavy, stern, questioning face of Dr. Armstrong at the door.
"So, gentlemen," said he, "you have attained your end, and have certainly chosen a particularly delicate moment for your intrusion.
I would not brawl in the presence of death, but I can assure you that if I were a younger man your monstrous conduct would not pass with impunity.
"Excuse me, Dr. Armstrong, I think we are a little at cross-purposes," said my friend, with dignity. "If you could step downstairs with us we may each be able to give some light to the other upon this miserable affair."
I wish you to understand, in the first place, that I am not employed by Lord Mount-James, and that my sympathies in this matter are entirely against that nobleman.
If, as I imagine, there is no breach of the law in this matter, you can absolutely depend upon my discretion and my co-operation in keeping the facts out of the papers.
She was as good as she was beautiful, and as intelligent as she was good. No man need be ashamed of such a wife.
But Godfrey was the heir to this crabbed old nobleman, and it was quite certain that the news of his marriage would have been the end of his inheritance.
I knew the lad well, and I loved him for his many excellent qualities. I did all I could to help him to keep things straight.
We did our very best to keep the thing from everyone, for when once such a whisper gets about it is not long before everyone has heard it.
But at last there came a terrible blow in the shape of dangerous illness to his wife. It was consumption of the most virulent kind.
The poor boy was half crazed with grief, and yet he had to go to London to play this match, for he could not get out of it without explanations which would expose his secret.
I tried to cheer him up by a wire, and he sent me one in reply imploring me to do all I could. This was the telegram which you appear in some inexplicable way to have seen.
I did not tell him how urgent the danger was, for I knew that he could do no good here, but I sent the truth to the girl's father, and he very injudiciously communicated it to Godfrey.
The result was that he came straight away in a state bordering on frenzy, and has remained in the same state, kneeling at the end of her bed, until this morning death put an end to her sufferings.
That is all, Mr. Holmes, and I am sure that I can rely upon your discretion and that of your friend.
"Come, Watson," said he, and we passed from that house of grief into the pale sunlight of the winter day.
It was on a bitterly cold and frosty morning during the winter of '97 that I was awakened by a tugging at my shoulder.
It was Holmes. The candle in his hand shone upon his eager, stooping face and told me at a glance that something was amiss.
Ten minutes later we were both in a cab and rattling through the silent streets on our way to Charing Cross Station.
The first faint winter's dawn was beginning to appear, and we could dimly see the occasional figure of an early workman as he passed us, blurred and indistinct in the opalescent London reek.
Holmes nestled in silence into his heavy coat, and I was glad to do the same, for the air was most bitter and neither of us had broken our fast.
It was not until we had consumed some hot tea at the station, and taken our places in the Kentish train, that we were sufficiently thawed, he to speak and I to listen.
"Hopkins has called me in seven times, and on each occasion his summons has been entirely justified," said Holmes.
I fancy that every one of his cases has found its way into your collection, and I must admit, Watson, that you have some power of selection which atones for much which I deplore in your narratives.
You slur over work of the utmost finesse and delicacy in order to dwell upon sensational details which may excite, but cannot possibly instruct, the reader.
I should say so. Hopkins's writing shows considerable agitation, and he is not an emotional man. Yes, I gather there has been violence, and that the body is left for our inspection.
A mere suicide would not have caused him to send for me. As to the release of the lady, it would appear that she has been locked in her room during the tragedy.
We are moving in high life, Watson; crackling paper, 'E.B.' monogram, coat-of-arms, picturesque address.
I think that friend Hopkins will live up to his reputation and that we shall have an interesting morning.
By an inspection of the trains and by reckoning the time. The local police had to be called in, they had to communicate with Scotland Yard, Hopkins had to go out, and he in turn had to send for me.
All that makes a fair night's work. Well, here we are at Chislehurst Station, and we shall soon set our doubts at rest.
A drive of a couple of miles through narrow country lanes brought us to a park gate, which was opened for us by an old lodge-keeper, whose haggard face bore the reflection of some great disaster.
The avenue ran through a noble park, between lines of ancient elms, and ended in a low, widespread house, pillared in front after the fashion of Palladio.
The central part was evidently of a great age and shrouded in ivy, but the large windows showed that modern changes had been carried out, and one wing of the house appeared to be entirely new.
The youthful figure and alert, eager face of Inspector Stanley Hopkins confronted us in the open doorway.
Exactly; the father and two sons. It's their work. I have not a doubt of it. They did a job at Sydenham a fortnight ago, and were seen and described.
Rather cool to do another so soon and so near, but it is they, beyond all doubt. It's a hanging matter this time.
Exactly--one of the richest men in Kent. Lady Brackenstall is in the morning-room. Poor lady, she has had a most dreadful experience.
She seemed half dead when I saw her first. I think you had best see her and hear her account of the facts.
Lady Brackenstall was no ordinary person. Seldom have I seen so graceful a figure, so womanly a presence, and so beautiful a face.
She was a blonde, golden-haired, blue-eyed, and would, no doubt, have had the perfect complexion which goes with such colouring had not her recent experience left her drawn and haggard.
Her sufferings were physical as well as mental, for over one eye rose a hideous, plum-coloured swelling, which her maid, a tall, austere woman, was bathing assiduously with vinegar and water.
She was enveloped in a loose dressing-gown of blue and silver, but a black sequin-covered dinner-dress was hung upon the couch beside her.
"I have told you all that happened, Mr. Hopkins," she said, wearily; "could you not repeat it for me?
Well, if you think it necessary, I will tell these gentlemen what occurred. Have they been in the dining-room yet?
I shall be glad when you can arrange matters. It is horrible to me to think of him still lying there.
She shuddered and buried her face in her hands. As she did so the loose gown fell back from her forearms.
"You have other injuries, madam! What is this?" Two vivid red spots stood out on one of the white, round limbs.
I am the wife of Sir Eustace Brackenstall. I have been married about a year. I suppose that it is no use my attempting to conceal that our marriage has not been a happy one.
I fear that all our neighbours would tell you that, even if I were to attempt to deny it. Perhaps the fault may be partly mine.
I was brought up in the freer, less conventional atmosphere of South Australia, and this English life, with its proprieties and its primness, is not congenial to me.
But the main reason lies in the one fact which is notorious to everyone, and that is that Sir Eustace was a confirmed drunkard.
To be with such a man for an hour is unpleasant. Can you imagine what it means for a sensitive and high-spirited woman to be tied to him for day and night?
It is a sacrilege, a crime, a villainy to hold that such a marriage is binding. I say that these monstrous laws of yours will bring a curse upon the land--Heaven will not let such wickedness endure.
For an instant she sat up, her cheeks flushed, and her eyes blazing from under the terrible mark upon her brow.
Then the strong, soothing hand of the austere maid drew her head down on to the cushion, and the wild anger died away into passionate sobbing.
Sir Eustace retired about half-past ten. The servants had already gone to their quarters. Only my maid was up, and she had remained in her room at the top of the house until I needed her services.
I sat until after eleven in this room, absorbed in a book. Then I walked round to see that all was right before I went upstairs.
It was my custom to do this myself, for, as I have explained, Sir Eustace was not always to be trusted.
I went into the kitchen, the butler's pantry, the gun-room, the billiard-room, the drawing-room, and finally the dining-room.
As I approached the window, which is covered with thick curtains, I suddenly felt the wind blow upon my face and realized that it was open.
I flung the curtain aside and found myself face to face with a broad-shouldered, elderly man who had just stepped into the room.
I stepped back, but the fellow was on me in an instant. He caught me first by the wrist and then by the throat.
I opened my mouth to scream, but he struck me a savage blow with his fist over the eye, and felled me to the ground.
I was so firmly bound that I could not move, and a handkerchief round my mouth prevented me from uttering any sound.
It was at this instant that my unfortunate husband entered the room. He had evidently heard some suspicious sounds, and he came prepared for such a scene as he found.
He fell without a groan, and never moved again. I fainted once more, but again it could only have been a very few minutes during which I was insensible.
When I opened my eyes I found that they had collected the silver from the sideboard, and they had drawn a bottle of wine which stood there.
Each of them had a glass in his hand. I have already told you, have I not, that one was elderly, with a beard, and the others young, hairless lads.
They might have been a father with his two sons. They talked together in whispers. Then they came over and made sure that I was still securely bound.
Finally they withdrew, closing the window after them. It was quite a quarter of an hour before I got my mouth free.
When I did so my screams brought the maid to my assistance. The other servants were soon alarmed, and we sent for the local police, who instantly communicated with London.
That is really all that I can tell you, gentlemen, and I trust that it will not be necessary for me to go over so painful a story again.
"I will not impose any further tax upon Lady Brackenstall's patience and time," said Holmes. "Before I go into the dining-room I should like to hear your experience."
"I saw the men before ever they came into the house," said she. "As I sat by my bedroom window I saw three men in the moonlight down by the lodge gate yonder, but I thought nothing of it at the time.
It was more than an hour after that I heard my mistress scream, and down I ran, to find her, poor lamb, just as she says, and him on the floor with his blood and brains over the room.
You've questioned her long enough, you gentlemen, and now she is coming to her own room, just with her old Theresa, to get the rest that she badly needs.
"She has been with her all her life," said Hopkins. "Nursed her as a baby, and came with her to England when they first left Australia eighteen months ago.
Theresa Wright is her name, and the kind of maid you don't pick up nowadays. This way, Mr. Holmes, if you please!
The keen interest had passed out of Holmes's expressive face, and I knew that with the mystery all the charm of the case had departed.
There still remained an arrest to be effected, but what were these commonplace rogues that he should soil his hands with them?
An abstruse and learned specialist who finds that he has been called in for a case of measles would experience something of the annoyance which I read in my friend's eyes.
Yet the scene in the dining-room of the Abbey Grange was sufficiently strange to arrest his attention and to recall his waning interest.
It was a very large and high chamber, with carved oak ceiling, oaken panelling, and a fine array of deer's heads and ancient weapons around the walls.
At the farther end from the door was the high French window of which we had heard. Three smaller windows on the right-hand side filled the apartment with cold winter sunshine.
On the left was a large, deep fireplace, with a massive, over-hanging oak mantelpiece. Beside the fireplace was a heavy oaken chair with arms and cross-bars at the bottom.
In and out through the open woodwork was woven a crimson cord, which was secured at each side to the crosspiece below.
In releasing the lady the cord had been slipped off her, but the knots with which it had been secured still remained.
These details only struck our attention afterwards, for our thoughts were entirely absorbed by the terrible object which lay upon the tiger-skin hearthrug in front of the fire.
It was the body of a tall, well-made man, about forty years of age. He lay upon his back, his face upturned, with his white teeth grinning through his short black beard.
He had evidently been in his bed when the alarm had broken out, for he wore a foppish embroidered night-shirt, and his bare feet projected from his trousers.
His head was horribly injured, and the whole room bore witness to the savage ferocity of the blow which had struck him down.
Beside him lay the heavy poker, bent into a curve by the concussion. Holmes examined both it and the indescribable wreck which it had wrought.
Not the slightest. We have been on the look-out for him, and there was some idea that he had got away to America.
Now that we know the gang are here I don't see how they can escape. We have the news at every seaport already, and a reward will be offered before evening.
What beats me is how they could have done so mad a thing, knowing that the lady could describe them, and that we could not fail to recognise the description.
That is likely enough. If she seemed to be senseless they would not take her life. What about this poor fellow, Hopkins?
He was a good-hearted man when he was sober, but a perfect fiend when he was drunk, or rather when he was half drunk, for he seldom really went the whole way.
The devil seemed to be in him at such times, and he was capable of anything. From what I hear, in spite of all his wealth and his title, he very nearly came our way once or twice.
There was a scandal about his drenching a dog with petroleum and setting it on fire--her ladyship's dog, to make the matter worse--and that was only hushed up with difficulty.
Then he threw a decanter at that maid, Theresa Wright; there was trouble about that. On the whole, and between ourselves, it will be a brighter house without him.
Holmes was down on his knees examining with great attention the knots upon the red cord with which the lady had been secured.
Then he carefully scrutinized the broken and frayed end where it had snapped off when the burglar had dragged it down.
How did the burglar know no one would hear it? How dared he pull at a bell-rope in that reckless fashion?
Exactly, Mr. Holmes, exactly. You put the very question which I have asked myself again and again. There can be no doubt that this fellow must have known the house and its habits.
He must have perfectly understood that the servants would all be in bed at that comparatively early hour, and that no one could possibly hear a bell ring in the kitchen.
Therefore he must have been in close league with one of the servants. Surely that is evident. But there are eight servants, and all of good character.
"Other things being equal," said Holmes, "one would suspect the one at whose head the master threw a decanter.
The lady's story certainly seems to be corroborated, if it needed corroboration, by every detail which we see before us.
He walked to the French window and threw it open. "There are no signs here, but the ground is iron hard, and one would not expect them.
Yes; it was by their light and that of the lady's bedroom candle that the burglars saw their way about.
Well, they did not take much--only half-a-dozen articles of plate off the sideboard. Lady Brackenstall thinks that they were themselves so disturbed by the death of Sir Eustace that they did not ransack the house as they would otherwise have done.
The three glasses were grouped together, all of them tinged with wine, and one of them containing some dregs of bees-wing.
The bottle stood near them, two-thirds full, and beside it lay a long, deeply-stained cork. Its appearance and the dust upon the bottle showed that it was no common vintage which the murderers had enjoyed.
A change had come over Holmes's manner. He had lost his listless expression, and again I saw an alert light of interest in his keen, deep-set eyes.
Quite so. As a matter of fact that screw was NOT used. This bottle was opened by a pocket-screw, probably contained in a knife, and not more than an inch and a half long.
If you examine the top of the cork you will observe that the screw was driven in three times before the cork was extracted.
It has never been transfixed. This long screw would have transfixed it and drawn it with a single pull.
When you catch this fellow you will find that he has one of these multiplex knives in his possession.
But these glasses do puzzle me, I confess. Lady Brackenstall actually SAW the three men drinking, did she not?
Then there is an end of it. What more is to be said? And yet you must admit that the three glasses are very remarkable, Hopkins.
Of course, it must be a mere chance about the glasses. Well, good morning, Hopkins. I don't see that I can be of any use to you, and you appear to have your case very clear.
You will let me know when Randall is arrested, and any further developments which may occur. I trust that I shall soon have to congratulate you upon a successful conclusion.
During our return journey I could see by Holmes's face that he was much puzzled by something which he had observed.
At last, by a sudden impulse, just as our train was crawling out of a suburban station, he sprang on to the platform and pulled me out after him.
Surely there are details in her story which, if we looked at it in cold blood, would excite our suspicion.
As a matter of fact, burglars who have done a good stroke of business are, as a rule, only too glad to enjoy the proceeds in peace and quiet without embarking on another perilous undertaking.
Their cumulative effect is certainly considerable, and yet each of them is quite possible in itself. The most unusual thing of all, as it seems to me, is that the lady should be tied to the chair.
Well, I am not so clear about that, Watson; for it is evident that they must either kill her or else secure her in such a way that she could not give immediate notice of their escape.
But at any rate I have shown, have I not, that there is a certain element of improbability about the lady's story?
Exactly; but there was bees-wing only in one glass. You must have noticed that fact. What does that suggest to your mind?
Not at all. The bottle was full of it, and it is inconceivable that the first two glasses were clear and the third heavily charged with it.
There are two possible explanations, and only two. One is that after the second glass was filled the bottle was violently agitated, and so the third glass received the bees-wing.
That only two glasses were used, and that the dregs of both were poured into a third glass, so as to give the false impression that three people had been here.
In that way all the bees-wing would be in the last glass, would it not? Yes, I am convinced that this is so.
Seated in a corner like an interested student who observes the demonstration of his professor, I followed every step of that remarkable research.
The window, the curtains, the carpet, the chair, the rope--each in turn was minutely examined and duly pondered.
The body of the unfortunate baronet had been removed, but all else remained as we had seen it in the morning.
Then, to my astonishment, Holmes climbed up on to the massive mantelpiece. Far above his head hung the few inches of red cord which were still attached to the wire.
For a long time he gazed upward at it, and then in an attempt to get nearer to it he rested his knee upon a wooden bracket on the wall.
This brought his hand within a few inches of the broken end of the rope, but it was not this so much as the bracket itself which seemed to engage his attention.
"It's all right, Watson," said he. "We have got our case--one of the most remarkable in our collection.
But, dear me, how slow-witted I have been, and how nearly I have committed the blunder of my lifetime!
Man, Watson, man. Only one, but a very formidable person. Strong as a lion--witness the blow that bent that poker.
Six foot three in height, active as a squirrel, dexterous with his fingers; finally, remarkably quick-witted, for this whole ingenious story is of his concoction.
Yes, Watson, we have come upon the handiwork of a very remarkable individual. And yet in that bell-rope he has given us a clue which should not have left us a doubt.
Well, if you were to pull down a bell-rope, Watson, where would you expect it to break? Surely at the spot where it is attached to the wire.
Exactly. This end, which we can examine, is frayed. He was cunning enough to do that with his knife. But the other end is not frayed.
You could not observe that from here, but if you were on the mantelpiece you would see that it is cut clean off without any mark of fraying whatever.
You can reconstruct what occurred. The man needed the rope. He would not tear it down for fear of giving the alarm by ringing the bell.
What did he do? He sprang up on the mantelpiece, could not quite reach it, put his knee on the bracket--you will see the impression in the dust--and so got his knife to bear upon the cord.
I could not reach the place by at least three inches, from which I infer that he is at least three inches a bigger man than I.
Undoubtedly it is blood. This alone puts the lady's story out of court. If she were seated on the chair when the crime was done, how comes that mark?
No, no; she was placed in the chair AFTER the death of her husband. I'll wager that the black dress shows a corresponding mark to this.
We have not yet met our Waterloo, Watson, but this is our Marengo, for it begins in defeat and ends in victory.
I should like now to have a few words with the nurse Theresa. We must be wary for awhile, if we are to get the information which we want.
Yes, sir, it is true that he threw the decanter at me. I heard him call my mistress a name, and I told him that he would not dare to speak so if her brother had been there.
Then it was that he threw it at me. He might have thrown a dozen if he had but left my bonny bird alone.
He was for ever ill-treating her, and she too proud to complain. She will not even tell me all that he has done to her.
She never told me of those marks on her arm that you saw this morning, but I know very well that they come from a stab with a hat-pin.
The sly fiend--Heaven forgive me that I should speak of him so, now that he is dead, but a fiend he was if ever one walked the earth.
He was all honey when first we met him, only eighteen months ago, and we both feel as if it were eighteen years.
She had only just arrived in London. Yes, it was her first voyage--she had never been from home before.
He won her with his title and his money and his false London ways. If she made a mistake she has paid for it, if ever a woman did.
What month did we meet him? Well, I tell you it was just after we arrived. We arrived in June, and it was July.
They were married in January of last year. Yes, she is down in the morning-room again, and I have no doubt she will see you, but you must not ask too much of her, for she has gone through all that flesh and blood will stand.
Lady Brackenstall was reclining on the same couch, but looked brighter than before. The maid had entered with us, and began once more to foment the bruise upon her mistress's brow.
No, no, Lady Brackenstall, it is no use. You may have heard of any little reputation which I possess.
For an instant there was hesitation in her beautiful face. Then some new strong thought caused it to set like a mask.
Holmes took his hat and shrugged his shoulders. "I am sorry," he said, and without another word we left the room and the house.
There was a pond in the park, and to this my friend led the way. It was frozen over, but a single hole was left for the convenience of a solitary swan.
Holmes gazed at it and then passed on to the lodge gate. There he scribbled a short note for Stanley Hopkins and left it with the lodge-keeper.
"It may be a hit or it may be a miss, but we are bound to do something for friend Hopkins, just to justify this second visit," said he.
There is a second line of steamers which connect South Australia with England, but we will draw the larger cover first.
Holmes's card sent in to the manager ensured instant attention, and he was not long in acquiring all the information which he needed.
In June of '95 only one of their line had reached a home port. It was the ROCK OF GIBRALTAR, their largest and best boat.
A reference to the passenger list showed that Miss Fraser of Adelaide, with her maid, had made the voyage in her.
The boat was now on her way to Australia, somewhere to the south of the Suez Canal. Her officers were the same as in '95, with one exception.
The first officer, Mr. Jack Croker, had been made a captain and was to take charge of their new ship, the BASS ROCK, sailing in two days' time from Southampton.
He lived at Sydenham, but he was likely to be in that morning for instructions, if we cared to wait for him.
No; Mr. Holmes had no desire to see him, but would be glad to know more about his record and character.
That was the pith of the information with which Holmes left the office of the Adelaide-Southampton company.
Thence he drove to Scotland Yard, but instead of entering he sat in his cab with his brows drawn down, lost in profound thought.
Finally he drove round to the Charing Cross telegraph office, sent off a message, and then, at last, we made for Baker Street once more.
"No, I couldn't do it, Watson," said he, as we re-entered our room. "Once that warrant was made out nothing on earth would save him.
Once or twice in my career I feel that I have done more real harm by my discovery of the criminal than ever he had done by his crime.
I have learned caution now, and I had rather play tricks with the law of England than with my own conscience.
Before evening we had a visit from Inspector Stanley Hopkins. Things were not going very well with him.
I believe that you are a wizard, Mr. Holmes. I really do sometimes think that you have powers that are not human.
But you haven't helped me. You have made the affair far more difficult. What sort of burglars are they who steal silver and then throw it into the nearest pond?
It was certainly rather eccentric behaviour. I was merely going on the idea that if the silver had been taken by persons who did not want it, who merely took it for a blind as it were, then they would naturally be anxious to get rid of it.
Well, I thought it was possible. When they came out through the French window there was the pond, with one tempting little hole in the ice, right in front of their noses.
Quite so; you have got an admirable theory. I have no doubt that my own ideas were quite wild, but you must admit that they have ended in discovering the silver.
Dear me, Hopkins! That is certainly rather against your theory that they committed a murder in Kent last night.
It is fatal, Mr. Holmes, absolutely fatal. Still, there are other gangs of three besides the Randalls, or it may be some new gang of which the police have never heard.
Yes, Mr. Holmes; there is no rest for me until I have got to the bottom of the business. I suppose you have no hint to give me?
Ah, that's the question, of course. But I commend the idea to your mind. You might possibly find that there was something in it.
Dinner was over and the table cleared before Holmes alluded to the matter again. He had lit his pipe and held his slippered feet to the cheerful blaze of the fire.
A very sensible reply, Watson. You must look at it this way: what I know is unofficial; what he knows is official.
I have the right to private judgment, but he has none. He must disclose all, or he is a traitor to his service.
In a doubtful case I would not put him in so painful a position, and so I reserve my information until my own mind is clear upon the matter.
There was a sound upon the stairs, and our door was opened to admit as fine a specimen of manhood as ever passed through it.
He was a very tall young man, golden-moustached, blue-eyed, with a skin which had been burned by tropical suns, and a springy step which showed that the huge frame was as active as it was strong.
He closed the door behind him, and then he stood with clenched hands and heaving breast, choking down some overmastering emotion.
I got your telegram, and I came at the hour you said. I heard that you had been down to the office. There was no getting away from you.
Let's hear the worst. What are you going to do with me? Arrest me? Speak out, man! You can't sit there and play with me like a cat with a mouse.
"Give him a cigar," said Holmes. "Bite on that, Captain Croker, and don't let your nerves run away with you.
I should not sit here smoking with you if I thought that you were a common criminal, you may be sure of that.
To give me a true account of all that happened at the Abbey Grange last night--a TRUE account, mind you, with nothing added and nothing taken off.
I know so much already that if you go one inch off the straight I'll blow this police whistle from my window and the affair goes out of my hands for ever.
Well, I never thought to see her again; but last voyage I was promoted, and the new boat was not yet launched, so I had to wait for a couple of months with my people at Sydenham.
One day out in a country lane I met Theresa Wright, her old maid. She told me about her, about him, about everything.
I tell you, gentlemen, it nearly drove me mad. This drunken hound, that he should dare to raise his hand to her whose boots he was not worthy to lick!
Theresa was always my friend, for she loved Mary and hated this villain almost as much as I did. From her I learned the ways of the house.
Mary used to sit up reading in her own little room downstairs. I crept round there last night and scratched at the window.
At first she would not open to me, but in her heart I know that now she loves me, and she could not leave me in the frosty night.
She whispered to me to come round to the big front window, and I found it open before me so as to let me into the dining-room.
Again I heard from her own lips things that made my blood boil, and again I cursed this brute who mishandled the woman that I loved.
I had sprung for the poker, and it was a fair fight between us. See here on my arm where his first blow fell.
Then it was my turn, and I went through him as if he had been a rotten pumpkin. Do you think I was sorry?
Not I! It was his life or mine, but far more than that it was his life or hers, for how could I leave her in the power of this madman?
That was how I killed him. Was I wrong? Well, then, what would either of you gentlemen have done if you had been in my position?
Then I took a drop myself. Theresa was as cool as ice, and it was her plot as much as mine. We must make it appear that burglars had done the thing.
Theresa kept on repeating our story to her mistress, while I swarmed up and cut the rope of the bell.
Then I lashed her in her chair, and frayed out the end of the rope to make it look natural, else they would wonder how in the world a burglar could have got up there to cut it.
Then I gathered up a few plates and pots of silver, to carry out the idea of a robbery, and there I left them with orders to give the alarm when I had a quarter of an hour's start.
I dropped the silver into the pond and made off for Sydenham, feeling that for once in my life I had done a real good night's work.
"That's what I think," said he. "I know that every word is true, for you have hardly said a word which I did not know.
No one but an acrobat or a sailor could have got up to that bell-rope from the bracket, and no one but a sailor could have made the knots with which the cord was fastened to the chair.
You see how easy it was for me to lay my hands upon you when once I had started upon the right trail.
I am not sure that in defence of your own life your action will not be pronounced legitimate. However, that is for a British jury to decide.
Meanwhile I have so much sympathy for you that if you choose to disappear in the next twenty-four hours I will promise you that no one will hinder you.
What sort of proposal is that to make a man? I know enough of law to understand that Mary would be had as accomplice.
Do you think I would leave her alone to face the music while I slunk away? No, sir; let them do their worst upon me, but for Heaven's sake, Mr. Holmes, find some way of keeping my poor Mary out of the courts.
See here, Captain Croker, we'll do this in due form of law. You are the prisoner. Watson, you are a British jury, and I never met a man who was more eminently fitted to represent one.
I am the judge. Now, gentleman of the jury, you have heard the evidence. Do you find the prisoner guilty or not guilty?
Vox populi, vox Dei. You are acquitted, Captain Croker. So long as the law does not find some other victim you are safe from me.
Come back to this lady in a year, and may her future and yours justify us in the judgment which we have pronounced this night.
I HAD intended "The Adventure of the Abbey Grange" to be the last of those exploits of my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, which I should ever communicate to the public.
The real reason lay in the reluctance which Mr. Holmes has shown to the continued publication of his experiences.
If in telling the story I seem to be somewhat vague in certain details the public will readily understand that there is an excellent reason for my reticence.
The one, austere, high-nosed, eagle-eyed, and dominant, was none other than the illustrious Lord Bellinger, twice Premier of Britain.
They sat side by side upon our paper-littered settee, and it was easy to see from their worn and anxious faces that it was business of the most pressing importance which had brought them.
The Premier's thin, blue-veined hands were clasped tightly over the ivory head of his umbrella, and his gaunt, ascetic face looked gloomily from Holmes to me.
The European Secretary pulled nervously at his moustache and fidgeted with the seals of his watch-chain.
When I discovered my loss, Mr. Holmes, which was at eight o'clock this morning, I at once informed the Prime Minister.
"No, sir," said the Prime Minister, with the quick, decisive manner for which he was famous. "We have not done so, nor is it possible that we should do so.
To inform the police must, in the long run, mean to inform the public. This is what we particularly desire to avoid.
Because the document in question is of such immense importance that its publication might very easily--I might almost say probably--lead to European complications of the utmost moment.
It is not too much to say that peace or war may hang upon the issue. Unless its recovery can be attended with the utmost secrecy, then it may as well not be recovered at all, for all that is aimed at by those who have taken it is that its contents should be generally known.
I understand. Now, Mr. Trelawney Hope, I should be much obliged if you would tell me exactly the circumstances under which this document disappeared.
That can be done in a very few words, Mr. Holmes. The letter--for it was a letter from a foreign potentate--was received six days ago.
It was of such importance that I have never left it in my safe, but I have taken it across each evening to my house in Whitehall Terrace, and kept it in my bedroom in a locked despatch-box.
It was there last night. Of that I am certain. I actually opened the box while I was dressing for dinner, and saw the document inside.
This morning it was gone. The despatch-box had stood beside the glass upon my dressing-table all night.
I am a light sleeper, and so is my wife. We are both prepared to swear that no one could have entered the room during the night.
My wife had gone to the theatre. I waited up for her. It was half-past eleven before we went to our room.
No one is ever permitted to enter that room save the housemaid in the morning, and my valet, or my wife's maid, during the rest of the day.
They are both trusty servants who have been with us for some time. Besides, neither of them could possibly have known that there was anything more valuable than the ordinary departmental papers in my despatch-box.
"I have long known, sir, how high is your sense of public duty," said he. "I am convinced that in the case of a secret of this importance it would rise superior to the most intimate domestic ties."
You do me no more than justice, sir. Until this morning I have never breathed one word to my wife upon this matter.
Each member of the Cabinet was informed of it yesterday; but the pledge of secrecy which attends every Cabinet meeting was increased by the solemn warning which was given by the Prime Minister.
Good heavens, to think that within a few hours I should myself have lost it!" His handsome face was distorted with a spasm of despair, and his hands tore at his hair.
For a moment we caught a glimpse of the natural man, impulsive, ardent, keenly sensitive. The next the aristocratic mask was replaced, and the gentle voice had returned.
Besides the members of the Cabinet there are two, or possibly three, departmental officials who know of the letter.
I believe that no one abroad has seen it save the man who wrote it. I am well convinced that his Ministers--that the usual official channels have not been employed.
Now, sir, I must ask you more particularly what this document is, and why its disappearance should have such momentous consequences?
Mr. Holmes, the envelope is a long, thin one of pale blue colour. There is a seal of red wax stamped with a crouching lion.
"I fear, sir," said Holmes, "that, interesting and indeed essential as these details are, my inquiries must go more to the root of things.
That is a State secret of the utmost importance, and I fear that I cannot tell you, nor do I see that it is necessary.
If by the aid of the powers which you are said to possess you can find such an envelope as I describe with its enclosure, you will have deserved well of your country, and earned any reward which it lies in our power to bestow.
"You are two of the most busy men in the country," said he, "and in my own small way I have also a good many calls upon me.
I regret exceedingly that I cannot help you in this matter, and any continuation of this interview would be a waste of time.
The Premier sprang to his feet with that quick, fierce gleam of his deep-set eyes before which a Cabinet has cowered.
"I am not accustomed, sir----" he began, but mastered his anger and resumed his seat. For a minute or more we all sat in silence.
We must accept your terms, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right, and it is unreasonable for us to expect you to act unless we give you our entire confidence.
Then I will tell you, relying entirely upon your honour and that of your colleague, Dr. Watson. I may appeal to your patriotism also, for I could not imagine a greater misfortune for the country than that this affair should come out.
The letter, then, is from a certain foreign potentate who has been ruffled by some recent Colonial developments of this country.
It has been written hurriedly and upon his own responsibility entirely. Inquiries have shown that his Ministers know nothing of the matter.
There would be such a ferment, sir, that I do not hesitate to say that within a week of the publication of that letter this country would be involved in a great war.
Exactly. It was he. And it is this letter--this letter which may well mean the expenditure of a thousand millions and the lives of a hundred thousand men--which has become lost in this unaccountable fashion.
No, sir, we have strong reason to believe that he already understands that he has acted in an indiscreet and hot-headed manner.
If this is so, whose interest is it that the letter should come out? Why should anyone desire to steal it or to publish it?
There, Mr. Holmes, you take me into regions of high international politics. But if you consider the European situation you will have no difficulty in perceiving the motive.
The whole of Europe is an armed camp. There is a double league which makes a fair balance of military power.
Great Britain holds the scales. If Britain were driven into war with one confederacy, it would assure the supremacy of the other confederacy, whether they joined in the war or not.
Very clearly. It is then the interest of the enemies of this potentate to secure and publish this letter, so as to make a breach between his country and ours?
To any of the great Chancelleries of Europe. It is probably speeding on its way thither at the present instant as fast as steam can take it.
Mr. Trelawney Hope dropped his head on his chest and groaned aloud. The Premier placed his hand kindly upon his shoulder.
It is your misfortune, my dear fellow. No one can blame you. There is no precaution which you have neglected.
Now, sir, if a document of this importance were taken at that hour, where can it be now? No one has any reason to retain it.
It has been passed rapidly on to those who need it. What chance have we now to overtake or even to trace it?
I understand you to say that your room is on the second floor, that there is no entrance from without, and that from within no one could go up unobserved.
It must, then, be somebody in the house who has taken it. To whom would the thief take it? To one of several international spies and secret agents, whose names are tolerably familiar to me.
There are three who may be said to be the heads of their profession. I will begin my research by going round and finding if each of them is at his post.
If one is missing--especially if he has disappeared since last night--we will have some indication as to where the document has gone.
"Why should he be missing?" asked the European Secretary. "He would take the letter to an Embassy in London, as likely as not."
I fancy not. These agents work independently, and their relations with the Embassies are often strained.
I believe you are right, Mr. Holmes. He would take so valuable a prize to head-quarters with his own hands.
I think that your course of action is an excellent one. Meanwhile, Hope, we cannot neglect all our other duties on account of this one misfortune.
Should there be any fresh developments during the day we shall communicate with you, and you will no doubt let us know the results of your own inquiries.
When our illustrious visitors had departed Holmes lit his pipe in silence, and sat for some time lost in the deepest thought.
I had opened the morning paper and was immersed in a sensational crime which had occurred in London the night before, when my friend gave an exclamation, sprang to his feet, and laid his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.
"Yes," said he, "there is no better way of approaching it. The situation is desperate, but not hopeless.
Even now, if we could be sure which of them has taken it, it is just possible that it has not yet passed out of his hands.
After all, it is a question of money with these fellows, and I have the British Treasury behind me. If it's on the market I'll buy it--if it means another penny on the income-tax.
It is conceivable that the fellow might hold it back to see what bids come from this side before he tries his luck on the other.
There are only those three capable of playing so bold a game; there are Oberstein, La Rothiere, and Eduardo Lucas.
My friend has so often astonished me in the course of our adventures that it was with a sense of exultation that I realized how completely I had astonished him.
He stared in amazement, and then snatched the paper from my hands. This was the paragraph which I had been engaged in reading when he rose from his chair:--
Mr. Lucas is an unmarried man, thirty-four years of age, and his establishment consists of Mrs. Pringle, an elderly housekeeper, and of Mitton, his valet.
The former retires early and sleeps at the top of the house. The valet was out for the evening, visiting a friend at Hammersmith.
He then pushed open the door and entered. The room was in a state of wild disorder, the furniture being all swept to one side, and one chair lying on its back in the centre.
Beside this chair, and still grasping one of its legs, lay the unfortunate tenant of the house. He had been stabbed to the heart and must have died instantly.
The knife with which the crime had been committed was a curved Indian dagger, plucked down from a trophy of Oriental arms which adorned one of the walls.
Robbery does not appear to have been the motive of the crime, for there had been no attempt to remove the valuable contents of the room.
Mr. Eduardo Lucas was so well known and popular that his violent and mysterious fate will arouse painful interest and intense sympathy in a wide-spread circle of friends.
A coincidence! Here is one of the three men whom we had named as possible actors in this drama, and he meets a violent death during the very hours when we know that that drama was being enacted.
The odds are enormous against its being coincidence. No figures could express them. No, my dear Watson, the two events are connected--MUST be connected.
Not at all. They know all they see at Godolphin Street. They know--and shall know--nothing of Whitehall Terrace.
Only WE know of both events, and can trace the relation between them. There is one obvious point which would, in any case, have turned my suspicions against Lucas.
Godolphin Street, Westminster, is only a few minutes' walk from Whitehall Terrace. The other secret agents whom I have named live in the extreme West-end.
Mrs. Hudson had appeared with a lady's card upon her salver. Holmes glanced at it, raised his eyebrows, and handed it over to me.
A moment later our modest apartment, already so distinguished that morning, was further honoured by the entrance of the most lovely woman in London.
And yet as we saw it that autumn morning, it was not its beauty which would be the first thing to impress the observer.
The cheek was lovely, but it was paled with emotion; the eyes were bright, but it was the brightness of fever; the sensitive mouth was tight and drawn in an effort after self-command.
Terror--not beauty--was what sprang first to the eye as our fair visitor stood framed for an instant in the open door.
"Mr. Holmes, I implore you not to tell him that I came here." Holmes bowed coldly, and motioned the lady to a chair.
Your ladyship places me in a very delicate position. I beg that you will sit down and tell me what you desire; but I fear that I cannot make any unconditional promise.
She swept across the room and seated herself with her back to the window. It was a queenly presence--tall, graceful, and intensely womanly.
"Mr. Holmes," she said, and her white-gloved hands clasped and unclasped as she spoke--"I will speak frankly to you in the hope that it may induce you to speak frankly in return.
There is complete confidence between my husband and me on all matters save one. That one is politics.
On this his lips are sealed. He tells me nothing. Now, I am aware that there was a most deplorable occurrence in our house last night.
I know that a paper has disappeared. But because the matter is political my husband refuses to take me into his complete confidence.
Now it is essential--essential, I say--that I should thoroughly understand it. You are the only other person, save only these politicians, who knows the true facts.
I beg you, then, Mr. Holmes, to tell me exactly what has happened and what it will lead to. Tell me all, Mr. Holmes.
Let no regard for your client's interests keep you silent, for I assure you that his interests, if he would only see it, would be best served by taking me into his complete confidence.
I have asked him. I come to you as a last resource. But without your telling me anything definite, Mr. Holmes, you may do a great service if you would enlighten me on one point.
One more question, Mr. Holmes. From an expression which my husband dropped in the first shock of this disaster I understood that terrible public consequences might arise from the loss of this document.
Once more I beg that you will say nothing of my visit." She looked back at us from the door, and I had a last impression of that beautiful haunted face, the startled eyes, and the drawn mouth.
"Now, Watson, the fair sex is your department," said Holmes, with a smile, when the dwindling frou-frou of skirts had ended in the slam of the front door.
Hum! Think of her appearance, Watson--her manner, her suppressed excitement, her restlessness, her tenacity in asking questions.
Remember also the curious earnestness with which she assured us that it was best for her husband that she should know all.
What did she mean by that? And you must have observed, Watson, how she manoeuvred to have the light at her back.
And yet the motives of women are so inscrutable. You remember the woman at Margate whom I suspected for the same reason.
No powder on her nose--that proved to be the correct solution. How can you build on such a quicksand?
Their most trivial action may mean volumes, or their most extraordinary conduct may depend upon a hairpin or a curling-tongs.
It is a capital mistake to theorize in advance of the facts. Do you stay on guard, my good Watson, and receive any fresh visitors.
All that day and the next and the next Holmes was in a mood which his friends would call taciturn, and others morose.
He ran out and ran in, smoked incessantly, played snatches on his violin, sank into reveries, devoured sandwiches at irregular hours, and hardly answered the casual questions which I put to him.
The coroner's jury brought in the obvious "Wilful Murder," but the parties remained as unknown as ever.
No motive was suggested. The room was full of articles of value, but none had been taken. The dead man's papers had not been tampered with.
They were carefully examined, and showed that he was a keen student of international politics, an indefatigable gossip, a remarkable linguist, and an untiring letter-writer.
He had been on intimate terms with the leading politicians of several countries. But nothing sensational was discovered among the documents which filled his drawers.
As to his relations with women, they appeared to have been promiscuous but superficial. He had many acquaintances among them, but few friends, and no one whom he loved.
His habits were regular, his conduct inoffensive. His death was an absolute mystery, and likely to remain so.
As to the arrest of John Mitton, the valet, it was a counsel of despair as an alternative to absolute inaction.
But no case could be sustained against him. He had visited friends in Hammersmith that night. The ALIBI was complete.
He had actually arrived at twelve o'clock, and appeared to be overwhelmed by the unexpected tragedy. He had always been on good terms with his master.
Mitton had been in Lucas's employment for three years. It was noticeable that Lucas did not take Mitton on the Continent with him.
Sometimes he visited Paris for three months on end, but Mitton was left in charge of the Godolphin Street house.
As to the housekeeper, she had heard nothing on the night of the crime. If her master had a visitor he had himself admitted him.
Upon the fourth day there appeared a long telegram from Paris which seemed to solve the whole question.
Our readers will remember that the deceased gentleman was found stabbed in his room, and that some suspicion attached to his valet, but that the case broke down on an ALIBI.
Yesterday a lady, who has been known as Mme. Henri Fournaye, occupying a small villa in the Rue Austerlitz, was reported to the authorities by her servants as being insane.
An examination showed that she had indeed developed mania of a dangerous and permanent form. On inquiry the police have discovered that Mme.
Henri Fournaye only returned from a journey to London on Tuesday last, and there is evidence to connect her with the crime at Westminster.
Mme. Fournaye, who is of Creole origin, is of an extremely excitable nature, and has suffered in the past from attacks of jealousy which have amounted to frenzy.
It is conjectured that it was in one of these that she committed the terrible crime which has caused such a sensation in London.
It is probable, therefore, that the crime was either committed when insane, or that its immediate effect was to drive the unhappy woman out of her mind.
At present she is unable to give any coherent account of the past, and the doctors hold out no hopes of the re-establishment of her reason.
There is evidence that a woman, who might have been Mme. Fournaye, was seen for some hours on Monday night watching the house in Godolphin Street.
"What do you think of that, Holmes?" I had read the account aloud to him, while he finished his breakfast.
The man's death is a mere incident--a trivial episode--in comparison with our real task, which is to trace this document and save a European catastrophe.
Now, if this letter were loose--no, it CAN'T be loose--but if it isn't loose, where can it be? Who has it?
Why is it held back? That's the question that beats in my brain like a hammer. Was it, indeed, a coincidence that Lucas should meet his death on the night when the letter disappeared?
Did the letter ever reach him? If so, why is it not among his papers? Did this mad wife of his carry it off with her?
If so, is it in her house in Paris? How could I search for it without the French police having their suspicions aroused?
It is a case, my dear Watson, where the law is as dangerous to us as the criminals are. Every man's hand is against us, and yet the interests at stake are colossal.
Should I bring it to a successful conclusion it will certainly represent the crowning glory of my career.
Ah, here is my latest from the front!" He glanced hurriedly at the note which had been handed in. "Halloa!
Lestrade seems to have observed something of interest. Put on your hat, Watson, and we will stroll down together to Westminster.
It was my first visit to the scene of the crime--a high, dingy, narrow-chested house, prim, formal, and solid, like the century which gave it birth.
Lestrade's bulldog features gazed out at us from the front window, and he greeted us warmly when a big constable had opened the door and let us in.
The room into which we were shown was that in which the crime had been committed, but no trace of it now remained, save an ugly, irregular stain upon the carpet.
This carpet was a small square drugget in the centre of the room, surrounded by a broad expanse of beautiful, old-fashioned wood-flooring in square blocks highly polished.
Over the fireplace was a magnificent trophy of weapons, one of which had been used on that tragic night.
In the window was a sumptuous writing-desk, and every detail of the apartment, the pictures, the rugs, and the hangings, all pointed to a taste which was luxurious to the verge of effeminacy.
Our French friends seem to have touched the spot this time. No doubt it's just as they say. She knocked at the door--surprise visit, I guess, for he kept his life in water-tight compartments.
He let her in--couldn't keep her in the street. She told him how she had traced him, reproached him, one thing led to another, and then with that dagger so handy the end soon came.
It wasn't all done in an instant, though, for these chairs were all swept over yonder, and he had one in his hand as if he had tried to hold her off with it.
Ah, yes, that's another matter--a mere trifle, but the sort of thing you take an interest in--queer, you know, and what you might call freakish.
Well, you know, after a crime of this sort we are very careful to keep things in their position. Nothing has been moved.
Officer in charge here day and night. This morning, as the man was buried and the investigation over--so far as this room is concerned--we thought we could tidy up a bit.
This carpet. You see, it is not fastened down; only just laid there. We had occasion to raise it. We found----
Well, I'm sure you would never guess in a hundred years what we did find. You see that stain on the carpet?
He took the corner of the carpet in his hand and, turning it over, he showed that it was indeed as he said.
Now I'll show you the explanation. There IS a second stain, but it does not correspond with the other.
See for yourself." As he spoke he turned over another portion of the carpet, and there, sure enough, was a great crimson spill upon the square white facing of the old-fashioned floor.
Why, it is simple enough. The two stains did correspond, but the carpet has been turned round. As it was square and unfastened it was easily done.
The official police don't need you, Mr. Holmes, to tell them that the carpet must have been turned round.
That's clear enough, for the stains lie above each other--if you lay it over this way. But what I want to know is, who shifted the carpet, and why?
"Look here, Lestrade," said he, "has that constable in the passage been in charge of the place all the time?"
Well, take my advice. Examine him carefully. Don't do it before us. We'll wait here. You take him into the back room.
You'll be more likely to get a confession out of him alone. Ask him how he dared to admit people and leave them alone in this room.
Don't ask him if he has done it. Take it for granted. Tell him you KNOW someone has been here. Press him.
"By George, if he knows I'll have it out of him!" cried Lestrade. He darted into the hall, and a few moments later his bullying voice sounded from the back room.
"Now, Watson, now!" cried Holmes, with frenzied eagerness. All the demoniacal force of the man masked behind that listless manner burst out in a paroxysm of energy.
He tore the drugget from the floor, and in an instant was down on his hands and knees clawing at each of the squares of wood beneath it.
One turned sideways as he dug his nails into the edge of it. It hinged back like the lid of a box. A small black cavity opened beneath it.
Holmes plunged his eager hand into it, and drew it out with a bitter snarl of anger and disappointment.
"Quick, Watson, quick! Get it back again!" The wooden lid was replaced, and the drugget had only just been drawn straight when Lestrade's voice was heard in the passage.
He found Holmes leaning languidly against the mantelpiece, resigned and patient, endeavouring to conceal his irrepressible yawns.
Sorry to keep you waiting, Mr. Holmes. I can see that you are bored to death with the whole affair. Well, he has confessed, all right.
I meant no harm, sir, I'm sure. The young woman came to the door last evening--mistook the house, she did.
She wanted to see where the crime was done--had read about it in the papers, she said. She was a very respectable, well-spoken young woman, sir, and I saw no harm in letting her have a peep.
When she saw that mark on the carpet, down she dropped on the floor, and lay as if she were dead. I ran to the back and got some water, but I could not bring her to.
Then I went round the corner to the Ivy Plant for some brandy, and by the time I had brought it back the young woman had recovered and was off--ashamed of herself, I dare say, and dared not face me.
Well, sir, it was a bit rumpled, certainly, when I came back. You see, she fell on it, and it lies on a polished floor with nothing to keep it in place.
It's lucky for you, my man, that nothing is missing, or you would find yourself in Queer Street. I'm sorry to have called you down over such a petty business, Mr. Holmes, but I thought the point of the second stain not corresponding with the first would interest you.
Don't know the name, sir. Was answering an advertisement about type-writing, and came to the wrong number--very pleasant, genteel young woman, sir.
Yes, sir; she was a well-grown young woman. I suppose you might say she was handsome. Perhaps some would say she was very handsome.
'Oh, officer, do let me have a peep!' says she. She had pretty, coaxing ways, as you might say, and I thought there was no harm in letting her just put her head through the door.
As we left the house Lestrade remained in the front room, while the repentant constable opened the door to let us out.
"Good Lord, sir!" he cried, with amazement on his face. Holmes put his finger on his lips, replaced his hand in his breast-pocket, and burst out laughing as we turned down the street.
"Excellent!" said he. "Come, friend Watson, the curtain rings up for the last act. You will be relieved to hear that there will be no war, that the Right Honourable Trelawney Hope will suffer no set-back in his brilliant career, that the indiscreet Sovereign will receive no punishment for his indiscretion, that the Prime Minister will have no European complication to deal with, and that with a little tact and management upon our part nobody will be a penny the worse for what might have been a very ugly incident."
Hardly that, Watson. There are some points which are as dark as ever. But we have so much that it will be our own fault if we cannot get the rest.
When we arrived at the residence of the European Secretary it was for Lady Hilda Trelawney Hope that Sherlock Holmes inquired.
"Mr. Holmes!" said the lady, and her face was pink with her indignation, "this is surely most unfair and ungenerous upon your part.
I desired, as I have explained, to keep my visit to you a secret, lest my husband should think that I was intruding into his affairs.
And yet you compromise me by coming here and so showing that there are business relations between us.
Unfortunately, madam, I had no possible alternative. I have been commissioned to recover this immensely important paper.
The lady sprang to her feet, with the colour all dashed in an instant from her beautiful face. Her eyes glazed--she tottered--I thought that she would faint.
Then with a grand effort she rallied from the shock, and a supreme astonishment and indignation chased every other expression from her features.
Do not ring, Lady Hilda. If you do, then all my earnest efforts to avoid a scandal will be frustrated.
Give up the letter and all will be set right. If you will work with me I can arrange everything. If you work against me I must expose you.
She stood grandly defiant, a queenly figure, her eyes fixed upon his as if she would read his very soul.
You are trying to frighten me. It is not a very manly thing, Mr. Holmes, to come here and browbeat a woman.
Pray sit down, madam. You will hurt yourself there if you fall. I will not speak until you sit down. Thank you.
One is enough, Lady Hilda. I know of your visit to Eduardo Lucas, of your giving him this document, of your ingenious return to the room last night, and of the manner in which you took the letter from the hiding-place under the carpet.
He drew a small piece of cardboard from his pocket. It was the face of a woman cut out of a portrait.
"I have carried this because I thought it might be useful," said he. "The policeman has recognised it."
Come, Lady Hilda. You have the letter. The matter may still be adjusted. I have no desire to bring trouble to you.
My duty ends when I have returned the lost letter to your husband. Take my advice and be frank with me; it is your only chance.
The butler had hardly closed the door behind him when Lady Hilda was down on her knees at Holmes's feet, her hands out-stretched, her beautiful face upturned and wet with her tears.
"Oh, spare me, Mr. Holmes! Spare me!" she pleaded, in a frenzy of supplication. "For Heaven's sake, don't tell him!
I love him so! I would not bring one shadow on his life, and this I know would break his noble heart.
Holmes raised the lady. "I am thankful, madam, that you have come to your senses even at this last moment!
"How can we return it?" Holmes muttered. "Quick, quick, we must think of some way! Where is the despatch-box?"
From out of her bosom Lady Hilda had drawn a small key. The box flew open. It was stuffed with papers.
Holmes thrust the blue envelope deep down into the heart of them, between the leaves of some other document.
"Now we are ready for him," said Holmes; "we have still ten minutes. I am going far to screen you, Lady Hilda.
In return you will spend the time in telling me frankly the real meaning of this extraordinary affair.
"Mr. Holmes, I will tell you everything," cried the lady. "Oh, Mr. Holmes, I would cut off my right hand before I gave him a moment of sorrow!
There is no woman in all London who loves her husband as I do, and yet if he knew how I have acted--how I have been compelled to act--he would never forgive me.
For his own honour stands so high that he could not forget or pardon a lapse in another. Help me, Mr. Holmes!
It was a letter of mine, Mr. Holmes, an indiscreet letter written before my marriage--a foolish letter, a letter of an impulsive, loving girl.
I meant no harm, and yet he would have thought it criminal. Had he read that letter his confidence would have been for ever destroyed.
I implored his mercy. He said that he would return my letter if I would bring him a certain document which he described in my husband's despatch-box.
He had some spy in the office who had told him of its existence. He assured me that no harm could come to my husband.
I did it, Mr. Holmes! I took an impression of his key; this man Lucas furnished a duplicate. I opened his despatch-box, took the paper, and conveyed it to Godolphin Street.
It was the next morning that I realized that I had only exchanged one trouble for another. My husband's anguish at the loss of his paper went to my heart.
I could hardly prevent myself from there and then kneeling down at his feet and telling him what I had done.
But that again would mean a confession of the past. I came to you that morning in order to understand the full enormity of my offence.
From the instant that I grasped it my whole mind was turned to the one thought of getting back my husband's paper.
It must still be where Lucas had placed it, for it was concealed before this dreadful woman entered the room.
If it had not been for her coming, I should not have known where his hiding-place was. How was I to get into the room?
For two days I watched the place, but the door was never left open. Last night I made a last attempt.
"Ah, thank heaven!" His face became radiant. "The Prime Minister is lunching with me. May he share your hopes?
He has nerves of steel, and yet I know that he has hardly slept since this terrible event. Jacobs, will you ask the Prime Minister to come up?
As to you, dear, I fear that this is a matter of politics. We will join you in a few minutes in the dining-room.
The Prime Minister's manner was subdued, but I could see by the gleam of his eyes and the twitchings of his bony hands that he shared the excitement of his young colleague.
"Purely negative as yet," my friend answered. "I have inquired at every point where it might be, and I am sure that there is no danger to be apprehended."
But that is not enough, Mr. Holmes. We cannot live for ever on such a volcano. We must have something definite.
I am in hopes of getting it. That is why I am here. The more I think of the matter the more convinced I am that the letter has never left this house.
But I am not convinced of it; I have known such things to happen. I presume there are other papers there.
Jacobs, bring down my despatch-box. This is a farcical waste of time, but still, if nothing else will satisfy you, it shall be done.
Thank you, Jacobs; put it here. I have always had the key on my watch-chain. Here are the papers, you see.
Letter from Lord Merrow, report from Sir Charles Hardy, memorandum from Belgrade, note on the Russo-German grain taxes, letter from Madrid, note from Lord Flowers--good heavens!
Thank you! Thank you! What a weight from my heart. But this is inconceivable--impossible. Mr. Holmes, you are a wizard, a sorcerer!
"I cannot believe my eyes!" He ran wildly to the door. "Where is my wife? I must tell her that all is well.
"Come, sir," said he. "There is more in this than meets the eye. How came the letter back in the box?"
He paced restlessly about our sitting-room in a fever of suppressed energy, biting his nails, tapping the furniture, and chafing against inaction.
I could see nothing recorded in the shape of crime which was not commonplace and futile. Holmes groaned and resumed his restless meanderings.
"The London criminal is certainly a dull fellow," said he in the querulous voice of the sportsman whose game has failed him.
Look out this window, Watson. See how the figures loom up, are dimly seen, and then blend once more into the cloud-bank.
The thief or the murderer could roam London on such a day as the tiger does the jungle, unseen until he pounces, and then evident only to his victim.
"This great and sombre stage is set for something more worthy than that," said he. "It is fortunate for this community that I am not a criminal."
Suppose that I were Brooks or Woodhouse, or any of the fifty men who have good reason for taking my life, how long could I survive against my own pursuit?
A summons, a bogus appointment, and all would be over. It is well they don't have days of fog in the Latin countries-the countries of assassination.
Why not? It is as if you met a tram-car coming down a country lane. Mycroft has his rails and he runs on them.
His Pall Mall lodgings, the Diogenes Club, Whitehall-that is his cycle. Once, and only once, he has been here.
It recalls nothing to my mind. But that Mycroft should break out in this erratic fashion! A planet might as well leave its orbit.
I had some vague recollection of an explanation at the time of the Adventure of the Greek Interpreter.
I did not know you quite so well in those days. One has to be discreet when one talks of high matters of state.
You are right in thinking that he is under the British government. You would also be right in a sense if you said that occasionally he is the British government.
I thought I might surprise you. Mycroft draws four hundred and fifty pounds a year, remains a subordinate, has no ambitions of any kind, will receive neither honour nor title, but remains the most indispensable man in the country.
Well, his position is unique. He has made it for himself. There has never been anything like it before, nor will be again.
He has the tidiest and most orderly brain, with the greatest capacity for storing facts, of any man living.
The same great powers which I have turned to the detection of crime he has used for this particular business.
The conclusions of every department are passed to him, and he is the central exchange, the clearinghouse, which makes out the balance.
They began by using him as a short-cut, a convenience; now he has made himself an essential. In that great brain of his everything is pigeon-holed and can be handed out in an instant.
But Jupiter is descending to-day. What on earth can it mean? Who is Cadogan West, and what is he to Mycroft?
"I have it," I cried, and plunged among the litter of papers upon the sofa. "Yes, yes, here he is, sure enough!
This must be serious, Watson. A death which has caused my brother to alter his habits can be no ordinary one.
What in the world can he have to do with it? The case was featureless as I remember it. The young man had apparently fallen out of the train and killed himself.
"There has been an inquest," said I, "and a good many fresh facts have come out. Looked at more closely, I should certainly say that it was a curious case."
"Judging by its effect upon my brother, I should think it must be a most extraordinary one." He snuggled down in his armchair.
The man's name was Arthur Cadogan West. He was twenty-seven years of age, unmarried, and a clerk at Woolwich Arsenal.
There was no quarrel between them and she can give no motive for his action. The next thing heard of him was when his dead body was discovered by a plate-layer named Mason, just outside Aldgate Station on the Underground system in London.
The head was badly crushed-an injury which might well have been caused by a fall from the train. The body could only have come on the line in that way.
Had it been carried down from any neighbouring street, it must have passed the station barriers, where a collector is always standing.
Very good. The case is definite enough. The man, dead or alive, either fell or was precipitated from a train.
The trains which traverse the lines of rail beside which the body was found are those which run from west to east, some being purely Metropolitan, and some from Willesden and outlying junctions.
It can be stated for certain that this young man, when he met his death, was travelling in this direction at some late hour of the night, but at what point he entered the train it is impossible to state.
No ticket! Dear me, Watson, this is really very singular. According to my experience it is not possible to reach the platform of a Metropolitan train without exhibiting one's ticket.
Presumably, then, the young man had one. Was it taken from him in order to conceal the station from which he came?
It is possible. Or did he drop it in the carriage? That is also possible. But the point is of curious interest.
Apparently not. There is a list here of his possessions. His purse contained two pounds fifteen. He had also a check-book on the Woolwich branch of the Capital and Counties Bank.
Through this his identity was established. There were also two dress-circle tickets for the Woolwich Theatre, dated for that very evening.
There we have it at last, Watson! British government-Woolwich. Arsenal-technical papers-Brother Mycroft, the chain is complete.
A moment later the tall and portly form of Mycroft Holmes was ushered into the room. Heavily built and massive, there was a suggestion of uncouth physical inertia in the figure, but above this unwieldy frame there was perched a head so masterful in its brow, so alert in its steel-grey, deep-set eyes, so firm in its lips, and so subtle in its play of expression, that after the first glance one forgot the gross body and remembered only the dominant mind.
At his heels came our old friend Lestrade, of Scotland Yard-thin and austere. The gravity of both their faces foretold some weighty quest.
The detective shook hands without a word. Mycroft Holmes struggled out of his overcoat and subsided into an armchair.
"A most annoying business, Sherlock," said he. "I extremely dislike altering my habits, but the powers that be would take no denial.
In the present state of Siam it is most awkward that I should be away from the office. But it is a real crisis.
I have never seen the Prime Minister so upset. As to the Admiralty-it is buzzing like an overturned bee-hive.
Ah, there's the point! Fortunately, it has not come out. The press would be furious if it did. The papers which this wretched youth had in his pocket were the plans of the Bruce-Partington submarine.
Mycroft Holmes spoke with a solemnity which showed his sense of the importance of the subject. His brother and I sat expectant.
Its importance can hardly be exaggerated. It has been the most jealously guarded of all government secrets.
You may take it from me that naval warfare becomes impossible within the radius of a Bruce-Partington's operation.
Two years ago a very large sum was smuggled through the Estimates and was expended in acquiring a monopoly of the invention.
And yet here we find them in the pocket of a dead junior clerk in the heart of London. From an official point of view it's simply awful.
No, Sherlock, no! That's the pinch. We have not. Ten papers were taken from Woolwich. There were seven in the pocket of Cadogan West.
The three most essential are gone-stolen, vanished. You must drop everything, Sherlock. Never mind your usual petty puzzles of the police-court.
Possibly, Sherlock. But it is a question of getting details. Give me your details, and from an armchair I will return you an excellent expert opinion.
No, you are the one man who can clear the matter up. If you have a fancy to see your name in the next honours list-
"I play the game for the game's own sake," said he. "But the problem certainly presents some points of interest, and I shall be very pleased to look into it.
I have jotted down the more essential ones upon this sheet of paper, together with a few addresses which you will find of service.
The actual official guardian of the papers is the famous government expert, Sir James Walter, whose decorations and sub-titles fill two lines of a book of reference.
He has grown grey in the service, is a gentleman, a favoured guest in the most exalted houses, and, above all, a man whose patriotism is beyond suspicion.
He was at the house of Admiral Sinclair at Barclay Square during the whole of the evening when this incident occurred.
Yes; his brother, Colonel Valentine Walter, has testified to his departure from Woolwich, and Admiral Sinclair to his arrival in London; so Sir James is no longer a direct factor in the problem.
The senior clerk and draughtsman, Mr. Sidney Johnson. He is a man of forty, married, with five children.
He is a silent, morose man, but he has, on the whole, an excellent record in the public service. He is unpopular with his colleagues, but a hard worker.
According to his own account, corroborated only by the word of his wife, he was at home the whole of Monday evening after office hours, and his key has never left the watch-chain upon which it hangs.
He has been ten years in the service and has done good work. He has the reputation of being hot-headed and imperious, but a straight, honest man.
We have nothing against him. He was next Sidney Johnson in the office. His duties brought him into daily, personal contact with the plans.
Well, it is surely perfectly clear who took them away. They are actually found upon the person of this junior clerk, Cadogan West.
Then we must take that as our working hypothesis. Young West took the papers. Now this could only be done by having a false key-
He had, then, several false keys. He took the papers to London to sell the secret, intending, no doubt, to have the plans themselves back in the safe next morning before they were missed.
We will suppose that he was travelling back to Woolwich when he was killed and thrown out of the compartment.
Aldgate, where the body was found, is considerably past the station London Bridge, which would be his route to Woolwich.
Many circumstances could be imagined under which he would pass London Bridge. There was someone in the carriage, for example, with whom he was having an absorbing interview.
This interview led to a violent scene in which he lost his life. Possibly he tried to leave the carriage, fell out on the line, and so met his end.
No better explanation can be given with our present knowledge; and yet consider, Sherlock, how much you leave untouched.
We will suppose, for argument's sake, that young Cadogan West had determined to convey these papers to London.
A very singular one. That is objection No. 1. Objection No. 2: We will suppose that he reaches London and sees the foreign agent.
He must bring back the papers before morning or the loss will be discovered. He took away ten. Only seven were in his pocket.
What had become of the other three? He certainly would not leave them of his own free will. Then, again, where is the price of his treason?
"It seems to me perfectly clear," said Lestrade. "I have no doubt at all as to what occurred. He took the papers to sell them.
He saw the agent. They could not agree as to price. He started home again, but the agent went with him.
In the train the agent murdered him, took the more essential papers, and threw his body from the carriage.
The ticket would have shown which station was nearest the agent's house. Therefore he took it from the murdered man's pocket.
"Good, Lestrade, very good," said Holmes. "Your theory holds together. But if this is true, then the case is at an end.
On the one hand, the traitor is dead. On the other, the plans of the Bruce-Partington submarine are presumably already on the Continent.
"To act, Sherlock-to act!" cried Mycroft, springing to his feet. "All my instincts are against this explanation.
Use your powers! Go to the scene of the crime! See the people concerned! Leave no stone unturned! In all your career you have never had so great a chance of serving your country.
"Well, well!" said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "Come, Watson! And you, Lestrade, could you favour us with your company for an hour or two?
We will begin our investigation by a visit to Aldgate Station. Good-bye, Mycroft. I shall let you have a report before evening, but I warn you in advance that you have little to expect.
An hour later Holmes, Lestrade and I stood upon the Underground railroad at the point where it emerges from the tunnel immediately before Aldgate Station.
"This is where the young man's body lay," said he, indicating a spot about three feet from the metals.
It could not have fallen from above, for these, as you see, are all blank walls. Therefore, it could only have come from a train, and that train, so far as we can trace it, must have passed about midnight on Monday.
There was dense fog, however, and nothing could be seen. He made no report of it at the time. Why, whatever is the matter with Mr.
My friend was standing with an expression of strained intensity upon his face, staring at the railway metals where they curved out of the tunnel.
Aldgate is a junction, and there was a network of points. On these his eager, questioning eyes were fixed, and I saw on his keen, alert face that tightening of the lips, that quiver of the nostrils, and concentration of the heavy, tufted brows which I knew so well.
An idea-an indication, no more. But the case certainly grows in interest. Unique, perfectly unique, and yet why not?
And yet one would have expected some bleeding. Would it be possible for me to inspect the train which contained the passenger who heard the thud of a fall in the fog?
"I can assure you, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, "that every carriage has been carefully examined. I saw to it myself."
It was one of my friend's most obvious weaknesses that he was impatient with less alert intelligences than his own.
"Very likely," said he, turning away. "As it happens, it was not the carriages which I desired to examine.
Watson, we have done all we can here. We need not trouble you any further, Mr. Lestrade. I think our investigations must now carry us to Woolwich.
At London Bridge, Holmes wrote a telegram to his brother, which he handed to me before dispatching it.
See some light in the darkness, but it may possibly flicker out. Meanwhile, please send by messenger, to await return at Baker Street, a complete list of all foreign spies or international agents known to be in England, with full address.-Sherlock.
"That should be helpful, Watson," he remarked as we took our seats in the Woolwich train. "We certainly owe Brother Mycroft a debt for having introduced us to what promises to be a really very remarkable case."
His eager face still wore that expression of intense and high-strung energy, which showed me that some novel and suggestive circumstance had opened up a stimulating line of thought.
He was a different man from the limp and lounging figure in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown who had prowled so restlessly only a few hours before round the fog-girt room.
"There is material here. There is scope," said he. "I am dull indeed not to have understood its possibilities."
The end is dark to me also, but I have hold of one idea which may lead us far. The man met his death elsewhere, and his body was on the roof of a carriage.
Remarkable, is it not? But consider the facts. Is it a coincidence that it is found at the very point where the train pitches and sways as it comes round on the points?
Is not that the place where an object upon the roof might be expected to fall off? The points would affect no object inside the train.
Either the body fell from the roof, or a very curious coincidence has occurred. But now consider the question of the blood.
Of course, there was no bleeding on the line if the body had bled elsewhere. Each fact is suggestive in itself.
Exactly. We could not explain the absence of a ticket. This would explain it. Everything fits together.
But suppose it were so, we are still as far as ever from unravelling the mystery of his death. Indeed, it becomes not simpler but stranger.
"Perhaps," said Holmes, thoughtfully, "perhaps." He relapsed into a silent reverie, which lasted until the slow train drew up at last in Woolwich Station.
"We have quite a little round of afternoon calls to make," said he. "I think that Sir James Walter claims our first attention."
The house of the famous official was a fine villa with green lawns stretching down to the Thames. As we reached it the fog was lifting, and a thin, watery sunshine was breaking through.
We were ushered into a dim-lit drawing-room, where an instant later we were joined by a very tall, handsome, light-bearded man of fifty, the younger brother of the dead scientist.
His wild eyes, stained cheeks, and unkempt hair all spoke of the sudden blow which had fallen upon the household.
"It was this horrible scandal," said he. "My brother, Sir James, was a man of very sensitive honour, and he could not survive such an affair.
It broke his heart. He was always so proud of the efficiency of his department, and this was a crushing blow.
We had hoped that he might have given us some indications which would have helped us to clear the matter up.
I assure you that it was all a mystery to him as it is to you and to all of us. He had already put all his knowledge at the disposal of the police.
I know nothing myself save what I have read or heard. I have no desire to be discourteous, but you can understand, Mr. Holmes, that we are much disturbed at present, and I must ask you to hasten this interview to an end.
"This is indeed an unexpected development," said my friend when we had regained the cab. "I wonder if the death was natural, or whether the poor old fellow killed himself!
If the latter, may it be taken as some sign of self-reproach for duty neglected? We must leave that question to the future.
"I cannot explain it, Mr. Holmes," she said. "I have not shut an eye since the tragedy, thinking, thinking, thinking, night and day, what the true meaning of it can be.
Arthur was the most single-minded, chivalrous, patriotic man upon earth. He would have cut his right hand off before he would sell a State secret confided to his keeping.
No; his needs were very simple and his salary ample. He had saved a few hundreds, and we were to marry at the New Year.
Only for the last week or so. He was thoughtful and worried. Once I pressed him about it. He admitted that there was something, and that it was concerned with his official life.
Go on, Miss Westbury. Even if it seems to tell against him, go on. We cannot say what it may lead to.
Indeed, I have nothing more to tell. Once or twice it seemed to me that he was on the point of telling me something.
He spoke one evening of the importance of the secret, and I have some recollection that he said that no doubt foreign spies would pay a great deal to have it.
We were to go to the theatre. The fog was so thick that a cab was useless. We walked, and our way took us close to the office.
He gave an exclamation; that was all. I waited but he never returned. Then I walked home. Next morning, after the office opened, they came to inquire.
About twelve o'clock we heard the terrible news. Oh, Mr. Holmes, if you could only, only save his honour!
"It was black enough before against this young man, but our inquiries make it blacker," he remarked as the cab lumbered off.
His coming marriage gives a motive for the crime. He naturally wanted money. The idea was in his head, since he spoke about it.
But surely, Holmes, character goes for something? Then, again, why should he leave the girl in the street and dart away to commit a felony?
Mr. Sidney Johnson, the senior clerk, met us at the office and received us with that respect which my companion's card always commanded.
He was a thin, gruff, bespectacled man of middle age, his cheeks haggard, and his hands twitching from the nervous strain to which he had been subjected.
The place is disorganised. The chief dead, Cadogan West dead, our papers stolen. And yet, when we closed our door on Monday evening, we were as efficient an office as any in the government service.
There is, but he has other departments to look after as well. He is an old soldier and a most trustworthy man.
Suppose that Cadogan West wished to make his way into the building after hours; he would need three keys, would he not, before he could reach the papers?
Yes, I think he was. I know that so far as those three keys are concerned he kept them on the same ring.
Then West, if he is the culprit, must have had a duplicate. And yet none was found upon his body. One other point: if a clerk in this office desired to sell the plans, would it not be simpler to copy the plans for himself than to take the originals, as was actually done?
No doubt we had, but I beg you won't try to drag me into the matter, Mr. Holmes. What is the use of our speculating in this way when the original plans were actually found on West?
Well, it is certainly singular that he should run the risk of taking originals if he could safely have taken copies, which would have equally served his turn.
Every inquiry in this case reveals something inexplicable. Now there are three papers still missing. They are, as I understand, the vital ones.
Do you mean to say that anyone holding these three papers, and without the seven others, could construct a Bruce-Partington submarine?
I reported to that effect to the Admiralty. But to-day I have been over the drawings again, and I am not so sure of it.
The double valves with the automatic self-adjusting slots are drawn in one of the papers which have been returned.
Until the foreigners had invented that for themselves they could not make the boat. Of course they might soon get over the difficulty.
I think, with your permission, I will now take a stroll round the premises. I do not recall any other question which I desired to ask.
He examined the lock of the safe, the door of the room, and finally the iron shutters of the window. It was only when we were on the lawn outside that his interest was strongly excited.
There was a laurel bush outside the window, and several of the branches bore signs of having been twisted or snapped.
He examined them carefully with his lens, and then some dim and vague marks upon the earth beneath. Finally he asked the chief clerk to close the iron shutters, and he pointed out to me that they hardly met in the centre, and that it would be possible for anyone outside to see what was going on within the room.
The indications are ruined by three days' delay. They may mean something or nothing. Well, Watson, I do not think that Woolwich can help us further.
He was alone and took a single third-class ticket. The clerk was struck at the time by his excited and nervous manner.
So shaky was he that he could hardly pick up his change, and the clerk had helped him with it. A reference to the timetable showed that the 8:15 was the first train which it was possible for West to take after he had left the lady about 7:30.
The effect of our inquiries at Woolwich has in the main been against young Cadogan West; but the indications at the window would lend themselves to a more favourable hypothesis.
Very good. We will now suppose that as he went to the theatre with the young lady he suddenly, in the fog, caught a glimpse of this same agent going in the direction of the office.
He was an impetuous man, quick in his decisions. Everything gave way to his duty. He followed the man, reached the window, saw the abstraction of the documents, and pursued the thief.
In this way we get over the objection that no one would take originals when he could make copies. This outsider had to take originals.
Then we come into difficulties. One would imagine that under such circumstances the first act of young Cadogan West would be to seize the villain and raise the alarm.
Why did he not do so? Could it have been an official superior who took the papers? That would explain West's conduct.
Or could the chief have given West the slip in the fog, and West started at once to London to head him off from his own rooms, presuming that he knew where the rooms were?
The call must have been very pressing, since he left his girl standing in the fog and made no effort to communicate with her.
Our scent runs cold here, and there is a vast gap between either hypothesis and the laying of West's body, with seven papers in his pocket, on the roof of a Metropolitan train.
My instinct now is to work from the other end. If Mycroft has given us the list of addresses we may be able to pick our man and follow two tracks instead of one.
Surely enough, a note awaited us at Baker Street. A government messenger had brought it post-haste. Holmes glanced at it and threw it over to me.
The latter was known to be in town on Monday and is now reported as having left. Glad to hear you have seen some light.
The Cabinet awaits your final report with the utmost anxiety. Urgent representations have arrived from the very highest quarter.
"I'm afraid," said Holmes, smiling, "that all the Queen's horses and all the Queen's men cannot avail in this matter."
He had spread out his big map of London and leaned eagerly over it. "Well, well," said he presently with an exclamation of satisfaction, "things are turning a little in our direction at last.
Why, Watson, I do honestly believe that we are going to pull it off, after all." He slapped me on the shoulder with a sudden burst of hilarity.
I am going out now. It is only a reconnaissance. I will do nothing serious without my trusted comrade and biographer at my elbow.
Do you stay here, and the odds are that you will see me again in an hour or two. If time hangs heavy get foolscap and a pen, and begin your narrative of how we saved the State.
I felt some reflection of his elation in my own mind, for I knew well that he would not depart so far from his usual austerity of demeanour unless there was good cause for exultation.
All the long November evening I waited, filled with impatience for his return. At last, shortly after nine o'clock, there arrived a messenger with a note:
Am dining at Goldini's Restaurant, Gloucester Road, Kensington. Please come at once and join me there.
It was a nice equipment for a respectable citizen to carry through the dim, fog-draped streets. I stowed them all discreetly away in my overcoat and drove straight to the address given.
Excellent. Let me give you a short sketch of what I have done, with some indication of what we are about to do.
Now it must be evident to you, Watson, that this young man's body was placed on the roof of the train.
That was clear from the instant that I determined the fact that it was from the roof, and not from a carriage, that he had fallen.
I should say it was impossible. If you examine the roofs you will find that they are slightly rounded, and there is no railing round them.
That was the question which we had to answer. There is only one possible way. You are aware that the Underground runs clear of tunnels at some points in the West End.
I had a vague memory that as I have travelled by it I have occasionally seen windows just above my head.
Now, suppose that a train halted under such a window, would there be any difficulty in laying a body upon the roof?
We must fall back upon the old axiom that when all other contingencies fail, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.
Here all other contingencies have failed. When I found that the leading international agent, who had just left London, lived in a row of houses which abutted upon the Underground, I was so pleased that you were a little astonished at my sudden frivolity.
Yes, that was it. Mr. Hugo Oberstein, of 13, Caulfield Gardens, had become my objective. I began my operations at Gloucester Road Station, where a very helpful official walked with me along the track and allowed me to satisfy myself not only that the back-stair windows of Caulfield Gardens open on the line but the even more essential fact that, owing to the intersection of one of the larger railways, the Underground trains are frequently held motionless for some minutes at that very spot.
So far-so far, Watson. We advance, but the goal is afar. Well, having seen the back of Caulfield Gardens, I visited the front and satisfied myself that the bird was indeed flown.
It is a considerable house, unfurnished, so far as I could judge, in the upper rooms. Oberstein lived there with a single valet, who was probably a confederate entirely in his confidence.
My dear fellow, you shall keep watch in the street. I'll do the criminal part. It's not a time to stick at trifles.
Think of Mycroft's note, of the Admiralty, the Cabinet, the exalted person who waits for news. We are bound to go.
"I knew you would not shrink at the last," said he, and for a moment I saw something in his eyes which was nearer to tenderness than I had ever seen.
"It is nearly half a mile, but there is no hurry. Let us walk," said he. "Don't drop the instruments, I beg.
Caulfield Gardens was one of those lines of flat-faced pillared, and porticoed houses which are so prominent a product of the middle Victorian epoch in the West End of London.
Next door there appeared to be a children's party, for the merry buzz of young voices and the clatter of a piano resounded through the night.
The fog still hung about and screened us with its friendly shade. Holmes had lit his lantern and flashed it upon the massive door.
"This is a serious proposition," said he. "It is certainly bolted as well as locked. We would do better in the area.
There is an excellent archway down yonder in case a too zealous policeman should intrude. Give me a hand, Watson, and I'll do the same for you.
A minute later we were both in the area. Hardly had we reached the dark shadows before the step of the policeman was heard in the fog above.
As its soft rhythm died away, Holmes set to work upon the lower door. I saw him stoop and strain until with a sharp crash it flew open.
We sprang through into the dark passage, closing the area door behind us. Holmes led the way up the curving, uncarpeted stair.
"Here we are, Watson-this must be the one." He threw it open, and as he did so there was a low, harsh murmur, growing steadily into a loud roar as a train dashed past us in the darkness.
Holmes swept his light along the window-sill. It was thickly coated with soot from the passing engines, but the black surface was blurred and rubbed in places.
You can see where they rested the body. Halloa, Watson! what is this? There can be no doubt that it is a blood mark.
He was pointing to faint discolorations along the woodwork of the window. "Here it is on the stone of the stair also.
We had not long to wait. The very next train roared from the tunnel as before, but slowed in the open, and then, with a creaking of brakes, pulled up immediately beneath us.
It was not four feet from the window-ledge to the roof of the carriages. Holmes softly closed the window.
I cannot agree with you there. From the moment that I conceived the idea of the body being upon the roof, which surely was not a very abstruse one, all the rest was inevitable.
If it were not for the grave interests involved the affair up to this point would be insignificant. Our difficulties are still before us.
We had ascended the kitchen stair and entered the suite of rooms upon the first floor. One was a dining-room, severely furnished and containing nothing of interest.
A second was a bedroom, which also drew blank. The remaining room appeared more promising, and my companion settled down to a systematic examination.
"The cunning dog has covered his tracks," said he. "He has left nothing to incriminate him. His dangerous correspondence has been destroyed or removed.
The recurring words, "water pressure" and "pressure to the square inch" suggested some possible relation to a submarine.
Holmes tossed them all impatiently aside. There only remained an envelope with some small newspaper slips inside it.
"A fairly complete record, Watson! If we could only get at the man at the other end!" He sat lost in thought, tapping his fingers on the table.
Well, perhaps it won't be so difficult, after all. There is nothing more to be done here, Watson. I think we might drive round to the offices of the _Daily Telegraph_, and so bring a good day's work to a conclusion.
Mycroft Holmes and Lestrade had come round by appointment after breakfast next day and Sherlock Holmes had recounted to them our proceedings of the day before.
"We can't do these things in the force, Mr. Holmes," said he. "No wonder you get results that are beyond us.
For England, home and beauty-eh, Watson? Martyrs on the altar of our country. But what do you think of it, Mycroft?
That was my idea when I put it in. I think if you could both make it convenient to come with us about eight o'clock to Caulfield Gardens we might possibly get a little nearer to a solution.
I remember that during the whole of that memorable day he lost himself in a monograph which he had undertaken upon the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus.
For my own part I had none of this power of detachment, and the day, in consequence, appeared to be interminable.
The great national importance of the issue, the suspense in high quarters, the direct nature of the experiment which we were trying-all combined to work upon my nerve.
It was a relief to me when at last, after a light dinner, we set out upon our expedition. Lestrade and Mycroft met us by appointment at the outside of Gloucester Road Station.
An hour passed and yet another. When eleven struck, the measured beat of the great church clock seemed to sound the dirge of our hopes.
Lestrade and Mycroft were fidgeting in their seats and looking twice a minute at their watches. Holmes sat silent and composed, his eyelids half shut, but every sense on the alert.
There had been a furtive step past the door. Now it returned. We heard a shuffling sound outside, and then two sharp taps with the knocker.
Holmes rose, motioning us to remain seated. The gas in the hall was a mere point of light. He opened the outer door, and then as a dark figure slipped past him he closed and fastened it.
Before our prisoner had recovered his balance the door was shut and Holmes standing with his back against it.
The man glared round him, staggered, and fell senseless upon the floor. With the shock, his broad-brimmed hat flew from his head, his cravat slipped down from his lips, and there were the long light beard and the soft, handsome delicate features of Colonel Valentine Walter.
"You can write me down an ass this time, Watson," said he. "This was not the bird that I was looking for."
The younger brother of the late Sir James Walter, the head of the Submarine Department. Yes, yes; I see the fall of the cards.
We had carried the prostrate body to the sofa. Now our prisoner sat up, looked round him with a horror-stricken face, and passed his hand over his forehead, like one who cannot believe his own senses.
"Everything is known, Colonel Walter," said Holmes. "How an English gentleman could behave in such a manner is beyond my comprehension.
But your whole correspondence and relations with Oberstein are within our knowledge. So also are the circumstances connected with the death of young Cadogan West.
Let me advise you to gain at least the small credit for repentance and confession, since there are still some details which we can only learn from your lips.
We are aware that you went down to the office in the fog on Monday night, but that you were seen and followed by young Cadogan West, who had probably some previous reason to suspect you.
He saw your theft, but could not give the alarm, as it was just possible that you were taking the papers to your brother in London.
Leaving all his private concerns, like the good citizen that he was, he followed you closely in the fog and kept at your heels until you reached this very house.
There he intervened, and then it was, Colonel Walter, that to treason you added the more terrible crime of murder.
I will. I swear to you that I will. I did the rest. I confess it. It was just as you say. A Stock Exchange debt had to be paid.
I needed the money badly. Oberstein offered me five thousand. It was to save myself from ruin. But as to murder, I am as innocent as you.
He had his suspicions before, and he followed me as you describe. I never knew it until I was at the very door.
It was thick fog, and one could not see three yards. I had given two taps and Oberstein had come to the door.
The young man rushed up and demanded to know what we were about to do with the papers. Oberstein had a short life-preserver.
He always carried it with him. As West forced his way after us into the house Oberstein struck him on the head.
The blow was a fatal one. He was dead within five minutes. There he lay in the hall, and we were at our wits' end what to do.
Then Oberstein had this idea about the trains which halted under his back window. But first he examined the papers which I had brought.
He said that three of them were essential, and that he must keep them. 'You cannot keep them,' said I.
'There will be a dreadful row at Woolwich if they are not returned.' 'I must keep them,' said he, 'for they are so technical that it is impossible in the time to make copies.'
'Then they must all go back together to-night,' said I. He thought for a little, and then he cried out that he had it.
'Three I will keep,' said he. 'The others we will stuff into the pocket of this young man. When he is found the whole business will assuredly be put to his account.'
I could see no other way out of it, so we did as he suggested. We waited half an hour at the window before a train stopped.
It was so thick that nothing could be seen, and we had no difficulty in lowering West's body on to the train.
He said nothing, but he had caught me once with his keys, and I think that he suspected. I read in his eyes that he suspected.
I will do anything I can. I owe this fellow no particular good-will. He has been my ruin and my downfall.
In his trunk were found the invaluable Bruce-Partington plans, which he had put up for auction in all the naval centres of Europe.
Some weeks afterwards I learned incidentally that my friend spent a day at Windsor, whence he returned with a remarkably fine emerald tie-pin.
When I asked him if he had bought it, he answered that it was a present from a certain gracious lady in whose interests he had once been fortunate enough to carry out a small commission.
He said no more; but I fancy that I could guess at that lady's august name, and I have little doubt that the emerald pin will forever recall to my friend's memory the adventure of the Bruce-Partington plans.
On the other hand, his payments were princely. I have no doubt that the house might have been purchased at the price which Holmes paid for his rooms during the years that I was with him.
The landlady stood in the deepest awe of him and never dared to interfere with him, however outrageous his proceedings might seem.
She was fond of him, too, for he had a remarkable gentleness and courtesy in his dealings with women.
He disliked and distrusted the sex, but he was always a chivalrous opponent. Knowing how genuine was her regard for him, I listened earnestly to her story when she came to my rooms in the second year of my married life and told me of the sad condition to which my poor friend was reduced.
"He's dying, Dr. Watson," said she. "For three days he has been sinking, and I doubt if he will last the day.
He would not let me get a doctor. This morning when I saw his bones sticking out of his face and his great bright eyes looking at me I could stand no more of it.
'With your leave or without it, Mr. Holmes, I am going for a doctor this very hour,' said I. 'Let it be Watson, then,' said he.
I was horrified for I had heard nothing of his illness. I need not say that I rushed for my coat and my hat.
There is little I can tell you, sir. He has been working at a case down at Rotherhithe, in an alley near the river, and he has brought this illness back with him.
He took to his bed on Wednesday afternoon and has never moved since. For these three days neither food nor drink has passed his lips.
He wouldn't have it, sir. You know how masterful he is. I didn't dare to disobey him. But he's not long for this world, as you'll see for yourself the moment that you set eyes on him.
He lay listlessly as I entered the room, but the sight of me brought a gleam of recognition to his eyes.
"Well, Watson, we seem to have fallen upon evil days," said he in a feeble voice, but with something of his old carelessness of manner.
"Stand back! Stand right back!" said he with the sharp imperiousness which I had associated only with moments of crisis.
Yes, Mrs. Hudson was right. He was more masterful than ever. It was pitiful, however, to see his exhaustion.
I know what is the matter with me. It is a coolie disease from Sumatra--a thing that the Dutch know more about than we, though they have made little of it up to date.
Good heavens, Holmes! Do you suppose that such a consideration weighs with me of an instant? It would not affect me in the case of a stranger.
I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of Holmes that I have always deferred to his wishes, even when I least understood them.
But now all my professional instincts were aroused. Let him be my master elsewhere, I at least was his in a sick room.
"Holmes," said I, "you are not yourself. A sick man is but a child, and so I will treat you. Whether you like it or not, I will examine your symptoms and treat you for them."
"If I am to have a doctor whether I will or not, let me at least have someone in whom I have confidence," said he.
In your friendship, certainly. But facts are facts, Watson, and, after all, you are only a general practitioner with very limited experience and mediocre qualifications.
Such a remark is unworthy of you, Holmes. It shows me very clearly the state of your own nerves. But if you have no confidence in me I would not intrude my services.
Let me bring Sir Jasper Meek or Penrose Fisher, or any of the best men in London. But someone you MUST have, and that is final.
If you think that I am going to stand here and see you die without either helping you myself or bringing anyone else to help you, then you have mistaken your man.
"You mean well, Watson," said the sick man with something between a sob and a groan. "Shall I demonstrate your own ignorance?
"There are many problems of disease, many strange pathological possibilities, in the East, Watson." He paused after each sentence to collect his failing strength.
I have learned so much during some recent researches which have a medico-criminal aspect. It was in the course of them that I contracted this complaint.
Possibly not. But I happen to know that Dr. Ainstree, the greatest living authority upon tropical disease, is now in London.
All remonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this instant to fetch him." I turned resolutely to the door.
Never have I had such a shock! In an instant, with a tiger-spring, the dying man had intercepted me. I heard the sharp snap of a twisted key.
The next moment he had staggered back to his bed, exhausted and panting after his one tremendous outflame of energy.
You won't take the key from me by force, Watson, I've got you, my friend. Here you are, and here you will stay until I will otherwise.
But I'll humour you." (All this in little gasps, with terrible struggles for breath between.) "You've only my own good at heart.
Of course I know that very well. You shall have your way, but give me time to get my strength. Not now, Watson, not now.
None in the world, Watson. Thank you, I need no help in arranging the clothes. You will please keep your distance.
Now, Watson, there is one other condition that I would make. You will seek help, not from the man you mention, but from the one that I choose.
The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you entered this room, Watson. You will find some books over there.
I am somewhat exhausted; I wonder how a battery feels when it pours electricity into a non-conductor?
But it was destined to be resumed long before that hour, and in circumstances which gave me a shock hardly second to that caused by his spring to the door.
I had stood for some minutes looking at the silent figure in the bed. His face was almost covered by the clothes and he appeared to be asleep.
Then, unable to settle down to reading, I walked slowly round the room, examining the pictures of celebrated criminals with which every wall was adorned.
Finally, in my aimless perambulation, I came to the mantelpiece. A litter of pipes, tobacco-pouches, syringes, penknives, revolver-cartridges, and other debris was scattered over it.
In the midst of these was a small black and white ivory box with a sliding lid. It was a neat little thing, and I had stretched out my hand to examine it more closely, when----
It was a dreadful cry that he gave--a yell which might have been heard down the street. My skin went cold and my hair bristled at that horrible scream.
As I turned I caught a glimpse of a convulsed face and frantic eyes. I stood paralyzed, with the little box in my hand.
"Put it down! Down, this instant, Watson--this instant, I say!" His head sank back upon the pillow and he gave a deep sigh of relief as I replaced the box upon the mantelpiece.
I hate to have my things touched, Watson. You know that I hate it. You fidget me beyond endurance. You, a doctor--you are enough to drive a patient into an asylum.
Of all ruins, that of a noble mind is the most deplorable. I sat in silent dejection until the stipulated time had passed.
He seemed to have been watching the clock as well as I, for it was hardly six before he began to talk with the same feverish animation as before.
Ah, too few! Too few! How very unfortunate, Watson! However, such as they are you can put them in your watchpocket.
And all the rest of your money in your left trouser pocket. Thank you. It will balance you so much better like that.
You will now light the gas, Watson, but you will be very careful that not for one instant shall it be more than half on.
I implore you to be careful, Watson. Thank you, that is excellent. No, you need not draw the blind. Now you will have the kindness to place some letters and papers upon this table within my reach.
Thank you. Now some of that litter from the mantelpiece. Excellent, Watson! There is a sugar-tongs there.
Kindly raise that small ivory box with its assistance. Place it here among the papers. Good! You can now go and fetch Mr. Culverton Smith, of 13 Lower Burke Street.
To tell the truth, my desire to fetch a doctor had somewhat weakened, for poor Holmes was so obviously delirious that it seemed dangerous to leave him.
Possibly not, my good Watson. It may surprise you to know that the man upon earth who is best versed in this disease is not a medical man, but a planter.
He is a very methodical person, and I did not desire you to start before six, because I was well aware that you would not find him in his study.
If you could persuade him to come here and give us the benefit of his unique experience of this disease, the investigation of which has been his dearest hobby, I cannot doubt that he could help me.
He still retained, however, the jaunty gallantry of his speech. To the last gasp he would always be the master.
"You will tell him exactly how you have left me," said he. "You will convey the very impression which is in your own mind--a dying man--a dying and delirious man.
Indeed, I cannot think why the whole bed of the ocean is not one solid mass of oysters, so prolific the creatures seem.
Ah, yes, I remember. My life depends upon it. Plead with him, Watson. There is no good feeling between us.
His nephew, Watson--I had suspicions of foul play and I allowed him to see it. The boy died horribly.
He has a grudge against me. You will soften him, Watson. Beg him, pray him, get him here by any means.
You will do nothing of the sort. You will persuade him to come. And then you will return in front of him.
Make any excuse so as not to come with him. Don't forget, Watson. You won't fail me. You never did fail me.
No doubt there are natural enemies which limit the increase of the creatures. You and I, Watson, we have done our part.
Shall the world, then, be overrun by oysters? No, no; horrible! You'll convey all that is in your mind.
I left him full of the image of this magnificent intellect babbling like a foolish child. He had handed me the key, and with a happy thought I took it with me lest he should lock himself in.
Mrs. Hudson was waiting, trembling and weeping, in the passage. Behind me as I passed from the flat I heard Holmes's high, thin voice in some delirious chant.
He looked at me in a most singular fashion. Had it not been too fiendish, I could have imagined that the gleam of the fanlight showed exultation in his face.
Lower Burke Street proved to be a line of fine houses lying in the vague borderland between Notting Hill and Kensington.
The particular one at which my cabman pulled up had an air of smug and demure respectability in its old-fashioned iron railings, its massive folding-door, and its shining brasswork.
All was in keeping with a solemn butler who appeared framed in the pink radiance of a tinted electrical light behind him.
My humble name and title did not appear to impress Mr. Culverton Smith. Through the half-open door I heard a high, petulant, penetrating voice.
Who is this person? What does he want? Dear me, Staples, how often have I said that I am not to be disturbed in my hours of study?
Well, I won't see him, Staples. I can't have my work interrupted like this. I am not at home. Say so.
Well, well, give him that message. He can come in the morning, or he can stay away. My work must not be hindered.
I thought of Holmes tossing upon his bed of sickness and counting the minutes, perhaps, until I could bring help to him.
It was not a time to stand upon ceremony. His life depended upon my promptness. Before the apologetic butler had delivered his message I had pushed past him and was in the room.
A high bald head had a small velvet smoking-cap poised coquettishly upon one side of its pink curve. The skull was of enormous capacity, and yet as I looked down I saw to my amazement that the figure of the man was small and frail, twisted in the shoulders and back like one who has suffered from rickets in his childhood.
"What's this?" he cried in a high, screaming voice. "What is the meaning of this intrusion? Didn't I send you word that I would see you to-morrow morning?"
The mention of my friend's name had an extraordinary effect upon the little man. The look of anger passed in an instant from his face.
The man motioned me to a chair, and turned to resume his own. As he did so I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror over the mantelpiece.
I could have sworn that it was set in a malicious and abominable smile. Yet I persuaded myself that it must have been some nervous contraction which I had surprised, for he turned to me an instant later with genuine concern upon his features.
"I am sorry to hear this," said he. "I only know Mr. Holmes through some business dealings which we have had, but I have every respect for his talents and his character.
He is an amateur of crime, as I am of disease. For him the villain, for me the microbe. There are my prisons," he continued, pointing to a row of bottles and jars which stood upon a side table.
Among those gelatine cultivations some of the very worst offenders in the world are now doing time.
It was on account of your special knowledge that Mr. Holmes desired to see you. He has a high opinion of you and thought that you were the one man in London who could help him.
"Oh, that's it--is it?" said he. "I trust the matter is not so grave as you suppose. How long has he been ill?"
Tut, tut! This sounds serious. It would be inhuman not to answer his call. I very much resent any interruption to my work, Dr. Watson, but this case is certainly exceptional.
Very good. I will go alone. I have a note of Mr. Holmes's address. You can rely upon my being there within half an hour at most.
It was with a sinking heart that I reentered Holmes's bedroom. For all that I knew the worst might have happened in my absence.
To my enormous relief, he had improved greatly in the interval. His appearance was as ghastly as ever, but all trace of delirium had left him and he spoke in a feeble voice, it is true, but with even more than his usual crispness and lucidity.
Exactly! Well, Watson, you have done all that a good friend could. You can now disappear from the scene.
Of course you must. But I have reasons to suppose that this opinion would be very much more frank and valuable if he imagines that we are alone.
I fear there is no alternative, Watson. The room does not lend itself to concealment, which is as well, as it is the less likely to arouse suspicion.
But just there, Watson, I fancy that it could be done." Suddenly he sat up with a rigid intentness upon his haggard face.
There are the wheels, Watson. Quick, man, if you love me! And don't budge, whatever happens--whatever happens, do you hear?
Don't speak! Don't move! Just listen with all your ears." Then in an instant his sudden access of strength departed, and his masterful, purposeful talk droned away into the low, vague murmurings of a semi-delirious man.
From the hiding-place into which I had been so swiftly hustled I heard the footfalls upon the stair, with the opening and the closing of the bedroom door.
Then, to my surprise, there came a long silence, broken only by the heavy breathings and gaspings of the sick man.
I could imagine that our visitor was standing by the bedside and looking down at the sufferer. At last that strange hush was broken.
"Holmes!" he cried. "Holmes!" in the insistent tone of one who awakens a sleeper. "Can't you hear me, Holmes?"
"I should imagine not," he said. "And yet, you see, I am here. Coals of fire, Holmes--coals of fire!"
You do. You are, fortunately, the only man in London who does. Do you know what is the matter with you?
Well, I shouldn't be surprised, Holmes. I shouldn't be surprised if it WERE the same. A bad lookout for you if it is.
Singular coincidence, Holmes. Very smart of you to notice it, but rather uncharitable to suggest that it was cause and effect.
Oh, you did, did you? Well, you couldn't prove it, anyhow. But what do you think of yourself spreading reports about me like that, and then crawling to me for help the moment you are in trouble?
You're precious near your end, my friend, but I don't want you to go till I have had a word with you.
That's why I give you water. There, don't slop it about! That's right. Can you understand what I say?
"Do what you can for me. Let bygones be bygones," he whispered. "I'll put the words out of my head--I swear I will.
Well, about Victor Savage's death. You as good as admitted just now that you had done it. I'll forget it.
You can forget it or remember it, just as you like. I don't see you in the witnessbox. Quite another shaped box, my good Holmes, I assure you.
It matters nothing to me that you should know how my nephew died. It's not him we are talking about. It's you.
The fellow who came for me--I've forgotten his name--said that you contracted it down in the East End among the sailors.
You are proud of your brains, Holmes, are you not? Think yourself smart, don't you? You came across someone who was smarter this time.
Yes, I will help you. I'll help you to understand just where you are and how you got there. I'd like you to know before you die.
Painful, is it? Yes, the coolies used to do some squealing towards the end. Takes you as cramp, I fancy.
Well, you can hear what I say, anyhow. Listen now! Can you remember any unusual incident in your life just about the time your symptoms began?
"Listen, Holmes!" There was a sound as if he was shaking the dying man, and it was all that I could do to hold myself quiet in my hiding-place.
You must hear me. You SHALL hear me. Do you remember a box--an ivory box? It came on Wednesday. You opened it--do you remember?
It was no joke, as you will find to your cost. You fool, you would have it and you have got it. Who asked you to cross my path?
The very one, by George! And it may as well leave the room in my pocket. There goes your last shred of evidence.
But you have the truth now, Holmes, and you can die with the knowledge that I killed you. You knew too much of the fate of Victor Savage, so I have sent you to share it.
"What is that?" said Smith. "Turn up the gas? Ah, the shadows begin to fall, do they? Yes, I will turn it up, that I may see you the better."
He crossed the room and the light suddenly brightened. "Is there any other little service that I can do you, my friend?"
I nearly called out in my joy and my amazement. He was speaking in his natural voice--a little weak, perhaps, but the very voice I knew.
There was a long pause, and I felt that Culverton Smith was standing in silent amazement looking down at his companion.
But it is the tobacco which I find most irksome. Ah, here ARE some cigarettes." I heard the striking of a match.
"And you might add of the attempted murder of one Sherlock Holmes," remarked my friend with a chuckle.
To save an invalid trouble, Inspector, Mr. Culverton Smith was good enough to give our signal by turning up the gas.
By the way, the prisoner has a small box in the right-hand pocket of his coat which it would be as well to remove.
Thank you. I would handle it gingerly if I were you. Put it down here. It may play its part in the trial.
"You'll only get yourself hurt," said the inspector. "Stand still, will you?" There was the click of the closing handcuffs.
"A nice trap!" cried the high, snarling voice. "It will bring YOU into the dock, Holmes, not me. He asked me to come here to cure him.
I was sorry for him and I came. Now he will pretend, no doubt, that I have said anything which he may invent which will corroborate his insane suspicions.
"I never needed it more," said Holmes as he refreshed himself with a glass of claret and some biscuits in the intervals of his toilet.
Knowing his vindictive nature, I was perfectly certain that he would come to look upon his handiwork.
Three days of absolute fast does not improve one's beauty, Watson. For the rest, there is nothing which a sponge may not cure.
With vaseline upon one's forehead, belladonna in one's eyes, rouge over the cheek-bones, and crusts of beeswax round one's lips, a very satisfying effect can be produced.
Malingering is a subject upon which I have sometimes thought of writing a monograph. A little occasional talk about half-crowns, oysters, or any other extraneous subject produces a pleasing effect of delirium.
At four yards, I could deceive you. If I failed to do so, who would bring my Smith within my grasp? No, Watson, I would not touch that box.
You can just see if you look at it sideways where the sharp spring like a viper's tooth emerges as you open it.
I dare say it was by some such device that poor Savage, who stood between this monster and a reversion, was done to death.
My correspondence, however, is, as you know, a varied one, and I am somewhat upon my guard against any packages which reach me.
It was clear to me, however, that by pretending that he had really succeeded in his design I might surprise a confession.
That pretence I have carried out with the thoroughness of the true artist. Thank you, Watson, you must help me on with my coat.
When we have finished at the police-station I think that something nutritious at Simpson's would not be out of place.
With this short preface I shall turn to my notes of what proved to be a strange, though a peculiarly terrible, chain of events.
It was a blazing hot day in August. Baker Street was like an oven, and the glare of the sunlight upon the yellow brickwork of the house across the road was painful to the eye.
It was hard to believe that these were the same walls which loomed so gloomily through the fogs of winter.
Our blinds were half-drawn, and Holmes lay curled upon the sofa, reading and re-reading a letter which he had received by the morning post.
For myself, my term of service in India had trained me to stand heat better than cold, and a thermometer at ninety was no hardship.
But the morning paper was uninteresting. Parliament had risen. Everybody was out of town, and I yearned for the glades of the New Forest or the shingle of Southsea.
A depleted bank account had caused me to postpone my holiday, and as to my companion, neither the country nor the sea presented the slightest attraction to him.
He loved to lie in the very center of five millions of people, with his filaments stretching out and running through them, responsive to every little rumour or suspicion of unsolved crime.
Appreciation of nature found no place among his many gifts, and his only change was when he turned his mind from the evil-doer of the town to track down his brother of the country.
Finding that Holmes was too absorbed for conversation I had tossed aside the barren paper, and leaning back in my chair I fell into a brown study.
"Most preposterous!" I exclaimed, and then suddenly realizing how he had echoed the inmost thought of my soul, I sat up in my chair and stared at him in blank amazement.
On my remarking that I was constantly in the habit of doing the same thing you expressed incredulity.
Perhaps not with your tongue, my dear Watson, but certainly with your eyebrows. So when I saw you throw down your paper and enter upon a train of thought, I was very happy to have the opportunity of reading it off, and eventually of breaking into it, as a proof that I had been in rapport with you.
But I was still far from satisfied. "In the example which you read to me," said I, "the reasoner drew his conclusions from the actions of the man whom he observed.
If I remember right, he stumbled over a heap of stones, looked up at the stars, and so on. But I have been seated quietly in my chair, and what clues can I have given you?
You do yourself an injustice. The features are given to man as the means by which he shall express his emotions, and yours are faithful servants.
Your features and especially your eyes. Perhaps you cannot yourself recall how your reverie commenced?
Then I will tell you. After throwing down your paper, which was the action which drew my attention to you, you sat for half a minute with a vacant expression.
Then your eyes fixed themselves upon your newly framed picture of General Gordon, and I saw by the alteration in your face that a train of thought had been started.
But it did not lead very far. Your eyes flashed across to the unframed portrait of Henry Ward Beecher which stands upon the top of your books.
Then you glanced up at the wall, and of course your meaning was obvious. You were thinking that if the portrait were framed it would just cover that bare space and correspond with Gordon's picture there.
So far I could hardly have gone astray. But now your thoughts went back to Beecher, and you looked hard across as if you were studying the character in his features.
Then your eyes ceased to pucker, but you continued to look across, and your face was thoughtful. You were recalling the incidents of Beecher's career.
You felt so strongly about it that I knew you could not think of Beecher without thinking of that also.
But then, again, your face grew sadder, you shook your head. You were dwelling upon the sadness and horror and useless waste of life.
At this point I agreed with you that it was preposterous and was glad to find that all my deductions had been correct.
It was very superficial, my dear Watson, I assure you. I should not have intruded it upon your attention had you not shown some incredulity the other day.
But I have in my hands here a little problem which may prove to be more difficult of solution than my small essay in thought reading.
Have you observed in the paper a short paragraph referring to the remarkable contents of a packet sent through the post to Miss Cushing, of Cross Street, Croydon?
Ah! then you must have overlooked it. Just toss it over to me. Here it is, under the financial column.
I picked up the paper which he had thrown back to me and read the paragraph indicated. It was headed, "A Gruesome Packet."
At two o'clock yesterday afternoon a small packet, wrapped in brown paper, was handed in by the postman.
A cardboard box was inside, which was filled with coarse salt. On emptying this, Miss Cushing was horrified to find two human ears, apparently quite freshly severed.
Some years ago, however, when she resided at Penge, she let apartments in her house to three young medical students, whom she was obliged to get rid of on account of their noisy and irregular habits.
Some probability is lent to the theory by the fact that one of these students came from the north of Ireland, and, to the best of Miss Cushing's belief, from Belfast.
In the meantime, the matter is being actively investigated, Mr. Lestrade, one of the very smartest of our detective officers, being in charge of the case.
What say you, Watson? Can you rise superior to the heat and run down to Croydon with me on the off chance of a case for your annals?
You shall have it then. Ring for our boots and tell them to order a cab. I'll be back in a moment when I have changed my dressing-gown and filled my cigar-case.
A shower of rain fell while we were in the train, and the heat was far less oppressive in Croydon than in town.
Holmes had sent on a wire, so that Lestrade, as wiry, as dapper, and as ferret-like as ever, was waiting for us at the station.
It was a very long street of two-story brick houses, neat and prim, with whitened stone steps and little groups of aproned women gossiping at the doors.
Halfway down, Lestrade stopped and tapped at a door, which was opened by a small servant girl. Miss Cushing was sitting in the front room, into which we were ushered.
She was a placid-faced woman, with large, gentle eyes, and grizzled hair curving down over her temples on each side.
"They are in the outhouse, those dreadful things," said she as Lestrade entered. "I wish that you would take them away altogether."
So I shall, Miss Cushing. I only kept them here until my friend, Mr. Holmes, should have seen them in your presence.
"Quite so, madam," said Holmes in his soothing way. "I have no doubt that you have been annoyed more than enough already over this business."
Indeed I have, sir. I am a quiet woman and live a retired life. It is something new for me to see my name in the papers and to find the police in my house.
I won't have those things in here, Mr. Lestrade. If you wish to see them you must go to the outhouse.
It was a small shed in the narrow garden which ran behind the house. Lestrade went in and brought out a yellow cardboard box, with a piece of brown paper and some string.
There was a bench at the end of the path, and we all sat down while Homes examined one by one, the articles which Lestrade had handed to him.
"The string is exceedingly interesting," he remarked, holding it up to the light and sniffing at it. "What do you make of this string, Lestrade?"
Precisely. It is a piece of tarred twine. You have also, no doubt, remarked that Miss Cushing has cut the cord with a scissors, as can be seen by the double fray on each side.
The importance lies in the fact that the knot is left intact, and that this knot is of a peculiar character.
"So much for the string, then," said Holmes, smiling, "now for the box wrapper. Brown paper, with a distinct smell of coffee.
What, did you not observe it? I think there can be no doubt of it. Address printed in rather straggling characters: 'Miss S. Cushing, Cross Street, Croydon.'
Done with a broad-pointed pen, probably a J, and with very inferior ink. The word 'Croydon' has been originally spelled with an 'i', which has been changed to 'y'.
The parcel was directed, then, by a man--the printing is distinctly masculine--of limited education and unacquainted with the town of Croydon.
So far, so good! The box is a yellow, half-pound honeydew box, with nothing distinctive save two thumb marks at the left bottom corner.
It is filled with rough salt of the quality used for preserving hides and other of the coarser commercial purposes.
Yes, I have noticed that. But if this were the practical joke of some students from the dissecting-rooms, it would be as easy for them to send two odd ears as a pair.
The presumption is strongly against it. Bodies in the dissecting-rooms are injected with preservative fluid.
These ears bear no signs of this. They are fresh, too. They have been cut off with a blunt instrument, which would hardly happen if a student had done it.
Again, carbolic or rectified spirits would be the preservatives which would suggest themselves to the medical mind, certainly not rough salt.
A vague thrill ran through me as I listened to my companion's words and saw the stern gravity which had hardened his features.
This brutal preliminary seemed to shadow forth some strange and inexplicable horror in the background.
"There are objections to the joke theory, no doubt," said he, "but there are much stronger reasons against the other.
We know that this woman has led a most quiet and respectable life at Penge and here for the last twenty years.
She has hardly been away from her home for a day during that time. Why on earth, then, should any criminal send her the proofs of his guilt, especially as, unless she is a most consummate actress, she understands quite as little of the matter as we do?
"That is the problem which we have to solve," Holmes answered, "and for my part I shall set about it by presuming that my reasoning is correct, and that a double murder has been committed.
One of these ears is a woman's, small, finely formed, and pierced for an earring. The other is a man's, sun-burned, discoloured, and also pierced for an earring.
These two people are presumably dead, or we should have heard their story before now. To-day is Friday.
The packet was posted on Thursday morning. The tragedy, then, occurred on Wednesday or Tuesday, or earlier.
If the two people were murdered, who but their murderer would have sent this sign of his work to Miss Cushing?
We may take it that the sender of the packet is the man whom we want. But he must have some strong reason for sending Miss Cushing this packet.
What reason then? It must have been to tell her that the deed was done! or to pain her, perhaps. But in that case she knows who it is.
Does she know? I doubt it. If she knew, why should she call the police in? She might have buried the ears, and no one would have been the wiser.
That is what she would have done if she had wished to shield the criminal. But if she does not wish to shield him she would give his name.
There is a tangle here which needs straightening out." He had been talking in a high, quick voice, staring blankly up over the garden fence, but now he sprang briskly to his feet and walked towards the house.
"In that case I may leave you here," said Lestrade, "for I have another small business on hand. I think that I have nothing further to learn from Miss Cushing.
"We shall look in on our way to the train," answered Holmes. A moment later he and I were back in the front room, where the impassive lady was still quietly working away at her antimacassar.
"I am convinced, sir," she said, "that this matter is a mistake, and that the parcel was never meant for me at all.
I have said this several times to the gentlemen from Scotland Yard, but he simply laughs at me. I have not an enemy in the world, as far as I know, so why should anyone play me such a trick?
Surprise and satisfaction were both for an instant to be read upon his eager face, though when she glanced round to find out the cause of his silence he had become as demure as ever.
I stared hard myself at her flat, grizzled hair, her trim cap, her little gilt earrings, her placid features; but I could see nothing which could account for my companion's evident excitement.
I observed the very instant that I entered the room that you have a portrait group of three ladies upon the mantelpiece, one of whom is undoubtedly yourself, while the others are so exceedingly like you that there could be no doubt of the relationship.
And here at my elbow is another portrait, taken at Liverpool, of your younger sister, in the company of a man who appears to be a steward by his uniform.
Well, you are quite right. But she was married to Mr. Browner a few days afterwards. He was on the South American line when that was taken, but he was so fond of her that he couldn't abide to leave her for so long, and he got into the Liverpool and London boats.
Ah! it was a bad day that ever he took a glass in his hand again. First he dropped me, then he quarrelled with Sarah, and now that Mary has stopped writing we don't know how things are going with them.
It was evident that Miss Cushing had come upon a subject on which she felt very deeply. Like most people who lead a lonely life, she was shy at first, but ended by becoming extremely communicative.
"About your second sister, Sarah," said he. "I wonder, since you are both maiden ladies, that you do not keep house together."
Ah! you don't know Sarah's temper or you would wonder no more. I tried it when I came to Croydon, and we kept on until about two months ago, when we had to part.
I don't want to say a word against my own sister, but she was always meddlesome and hard to please, was Sarah.
Yes, and they were the best of friends at one time. Why, she went up there to live in order to be near them.
And now she has no word hard enough for Jim Browner. The last six months that she was here she would speak of nothing but his drinking and his ways.
He had caught her meddling, I suspect, and given her a bit of his mind, and that was the start of it.
"Thank you, Miss Cushing," said Holmes, rising and bowing. "Your sister Sarah lives, I think you said, at New Street, Wallington?
Good-bye, and I am very sorry that you should have been troubled over a case with which, as you say, you have nothing whatever to do.
Very good. Jump in, Watson. We must strike while the iron is hot. Simple as the case is, there have been one or two very instructive details in connection with it.
Holmes sent off a short wire and for the rest of the drive lay back in the cab, with his hat tilted over his nose to keep the sun from his face.
Our drive pulled up at a house which was not unlike the one which we had just quitted. My companion ordered him to wait, and had his hand upon the knocker, when the door opened and a grave young gentleman in black, with a very shiny hat, appeared on the step.
"Miss Sarah Cushing is extremely ill," said he. "She has been suffering since yesterday from brain symptoms of great severity.
As her medical adviser, I cannot possibly take the responsibility of allowing anyone to see her. I should recommend you to call again in ten days.
I did not wish her to tell me anything. I only wanted to look at her. However, I think that I have got all that I want.
Drive us to some decent hotel, cabby, where we may have some lunch, and afterwards we shall drop down upon friend Lestrade at the police-station.
This led him to Paganini, and we sat for an hour over a bottle of claret while he told me anecdote after anecdote of that extraordinary man.
The afternoon was far advanced and the hot glare had softened into a mellow glow before we found ourselves at the police-station.
"Ha! It is the answer!" He tore it open, glanced his eyes over it, and crumpled it into his pocket. "That's all right," said he.
I was never more serious in my life. A shocking crime has been committed, and I think I have now laid bare every detail of it.
Holmes scribbled a few words upon the back of one of his visiting cards and threw it over to Lestrade.
Come on, Watson." We strode off together to the station, leaving Lestrade still staring with a delighted face at the card which Holmes had thrown him.
I have written to Lestrade asking him to supply us with the details which are now wanting, and which he will only get after he had secured his man.
That he may be safely trusted to do, for although he is absolutely devoid of reason, he is as tenacious as a bulldog when he once understands what he has to do, and indeed, it is just this tenacity which has brought him to the top at Scotland Yard.
It is fairly complete in essentials. We know who the author of the revolting business is, although one of the victims still escapes us.
However, we were really independent of her help. Our answers were waiting for us at the police-station, where I had directed Algar to send them.
Nothing could be more conclusive. Mrs. Browner's house had been closed for more than three days, and the neighbours were of opinion that she had gone south to see her relatives.
It had been ascertained at the shipping offices that Browner had left aboard of the May Day, and I calculate that she is due in the Thames tomorrow night.
When he arrives he will be met by the obtuse but resolute Lestrade, and I have no doubt that we shall have all our details filled in.
Sherlock Holmes was not disappointed in his expectations. Two days later he received a bulky envelope, which contained a short note from the detective, and a typewritten document, which covered several pages of foolscap.
I went down to the Albert Dock yesterday at 6 p.m., and boarded the S.S. May Day, belonging to the Liverpool, Dublin, and London Steam Packet Company.
On descending to his berth, I found him seated upon a chest with his head sunk upon his hands, rocking himself to and fro.
He is a big, powerful chap, clean-shaven, and very swarthy--something like Aldrige, who helped us in the bogus laundry affair.
We brought him along to the cells, and his box as well, for we thought there might be something incriminating; but, bar a big sharp knife such as most sailors have, we got nothing for our trouble.
We had three copies typewritten, one of which I enclose. The affair proves, as I always thought it would, to be an extremely simple one, but I am obliged to you for assisting me in my investigation.
"Hum! The investigation really was a very simple one," remarked Holmes, "but I don't think it struck him in that light when he first called us in.
However, let us see what Jim Browner has to say for himself. This is his statement as made before Inspector Montgomery at the Shadwell Police Station, and it has the advantage of being verbatim.
"What is the meaning of it, Watson?" said Holmes solemnly as he laid down the paper. "What object is served by this circle of misery and violence and fear?
It must tend to some end, or else our universe is ruled by chance, which is unthinkable. But what end?
There is the great standing perennial problem to which human reason is as far from an answer as ever.
Well, Mrs. Warren, I cannot see that you have any particular cause for uneasiness, nor do I understand why I, whose time is of some value, should interfere in the matter.
I really have other things to engage me." So spoke Sherlock Holmes and turned back to the great scrapbook in which he was arranging and indexing some of his recent material.
But he would never cease talking of it--your kindness, sir, and the way in which you brought light into the darkness.
Holmes was accessible upon the side of flattery, and also, to do him justice, upon the side of kindliness.
Well, well, Mrs. Warren, let us hear about it, then. You don't object to tobacco, I take it? Thank you, Watson--the matches!
You are uneasy, as I understand, because your new lodger remains in his rooms and you cannot see him.
My husband is as nervous over it as I am, but he is out at his work all day, while I get no rest from it.
What is he hiding for? What has he done? Except for the girl, I am all alone in the house with him, and it's more than my nerves can stand.
Holmes leaned forward and laid his long, thin fingers upon the woman's shoulder. He had an almost hypnotic power of soothing when he wished.
The scared look faded from her eyes, and her agitated features smoothed into their usual commonplace.
"If I take it up I must understand every detail," said he. "Take time to consider. The smallest point may be the most essential.
He asked my terms, sir. I said fifty shillings a week. There is a small sitting-room and bedroom, and all complete, at the top of the house.
Well, sir, they were that he was to have a key of the house. That was all right. Lodgers often have them.
Not in reason, sir. But this is out of all reason. He has been there for ten days, and neither Mr. Warren, nor I, nor the girl has once set eyes upon him.
We can hear that quick step of his pacing up and down, up and down, night, morning, and noon; but except on that first night he had never once gone out of the house.
Yes, sir, and returned very late--after we were all in bed. He told me after he had taken the rooms that he would do so and asked me not to bar the door.
It was his particular direction that we should always, when he rang, leave his meal upon a chair, outside his door.
Then he rings again when he has finished, and we take it down from the same chair. If he wants anything else he prints it on a slip of paper and leaves it.
Yes, sir; prints it in pencil. Just the word, nothing more. Here's the one I brought to show you--soap.
Here's another--match. This is one he left the first morning--daily gazette. I leave that paper with his breakfast every morning.
"Dear me, Watson," said Homes, staring with great curiosity at the slips of foolscap which the landlady had handed to him, "this is certainly a little unusual.
Seclusion I can understand; but why print? Printing is a clumsy process. Why not write? What would it suggest, Watson?
But why? What can it matter to him that his landlady should have a word of his writing? Still, it may be as you say.
It opens a pleasing field for intelligent speculation. The words are written with a broad-pointed, violet-tinted pencil of a not unusual pattern.
You will observe that the paper is torn away at the side here after the printing was done, so that the 's' of 'soap' is partly gone.
Exactly. There was evidently some mark, some thumbprint, something which might give a clue to the person's identity.
Well, we don't seem to have much material to help us. Do you say nothing has come out of that room--absolutely nothing?
The landlady drew an envelope from her bag; from it she shook out two burnt matches and a cigarette-end upon the table.
They were on his tray this morning. I brought them because I had heard that you can read great things out of small ones.
"There is nothing here," said he. "The matches have, of course, been used to light cigarettes. That is obvious from the shortness of the burnt end.
Half the match is consumed in lighting a pipe or cigar. But, dear me! this cigarette stub is certainly remarkable.
I don't understand that. I should say that only a clean-shaven man could have smoked this. Why, Watson, even your modest moustache would have been singed.
"There are certainly some points of interest in this case, Watson," he remarked when the landlady had left us.
It may, of course, be trivial--individual eccentricity; or it may be very much deeper than appears on the surface.
The first thing that strikes one is the obvious possibility that the person now in the rooms may be entirely different from the one who engaged them.
Well, apart from this cigarette-end, was it not suggestive that the only time the lodger went out was immediately after his taking the rooms?
He came back--or someone came back--when all witnesses were out of the way. We have no proof that the person who came back was the person who went out.
Then, again, the man who took the rooms spoke English well. This other, however, prints 'match' when it should have been 'matches.'
I can imagine that the word was taken out of a dictionary, which would give the noun but not the plural.
The laconic style may be to conceal the absence of knowledge of English. Yes, Watson, there are good reasons to suspect that there has been a substitution of lodgers.
"Ah! there lies our problem. There is one rather obvious line of investigation." He took down the great book in which, day by day, he filed the agony columns of the various London journals.
"Dear me!" said he, turning over the pages, "what a chorus of groans, cries, and bleatings! What a rag-bag of singular happenings!
How is any news or any message to reach him from without? Obviously by advertisement through a newspaper.
There seems no other way, and fortunately we need concern ourselves with the one paper only. Here are the Daily Gazette extracts of the last fortnight.
'Lady with a black boa at Prince's Skating Club'--that we may pass. 'Surely Jimmy will not break his mother's heart'--that appears to be irrelevant.
'If the lady who fainted on Brixton bus'--she does not interest me. 'Every day my heart longs--' Bleat, Watson--unmitigated bleat!
Ah, this is a little more possible. Listen to this: 'Be patient. Will find some sure means of communications.
Meanwhile, this column. G.' That is two days after Mrs. Warren's lodger arrived. It sounds plausible, does it not?
The mysterious one could understand English, even if he could not print it. Let us see if we can pick up the trace again.
Yes, here we are--three days later. 'Am making successful arrangements. Patience and prudence. The clouds will pass.
G.' Nothing for a week after that. Then comes something much more definite: 'The path is clearing. If I find chance signal message remember code agreed--One A, two B, and so on.
You will hear soon. G.' That was in yesterday's paper, and there is nothing in to-day's. It's all very appropriate to Mrs. Warren's lodger.
So it proved; for in the morning I found my friend standing on the hearthrug with his back to the fire and a smile of complete satisfaction upon his face.
"How's this, Watson?" he cried, picking up the paper from the table. "'High red house with white stone facings.
Third floor. Second window left. After dusk. G.' That is definite enough. I think after breakfast we must make a little reconnaissance of Mrs. Warren's neighbourhood.
Our client had suddenly burst into the room with an explosive energy which told of some new and momentous development.
"It's a police matter, Mr. Holmes!" she cried. "I'll have no more of it! He shall pack out of there with his baggage.
I would have gone straight up and told him so, only I thought it was but fair to you to take your opinion first.
Ah! that's what we want to know! It was this morning, sir. Mr. Warren is a timekeeper at Morton and Waylight's, in Tottenham Court Road.
They drove him an hour, and then opened the door and shot him out. He lay in the roadway so shaken in his wits that he never saw what became of the cab.
When he picked himself up he found he was on Hampstead Heath; so he took a bus home, and there he lies now on his sofa, while I came straight round to tell you what had happened.
"Most interesting," said Holmes. "Did he observe the appearance of these men--did he hear them talk?"
No; he is clean dazed. He just knows that he was lifted up as if by magic and dropped as if by magic.
Well, we've lived there fifteen years and no such happenings ever came before. I've had enough of him.
Wait a bit, Mrs. Warren. Do nothing rash. I begin to think that this affair may be very much more important than appeared at first sight.
It is clear now that some danger is threatening your lodger. It is equally clear that his enemies, lying in wait for him near your door, mistook your husband for him in the foggy morning light.
On discovering their mistake they released him. What they would have done had it not been a mistake, we can only conjecture.
I don't see how that is to be managed, unless you break in the door. I always hear him unlock it as I go down the stair after I leave the tray.
Well, sir, there's the box-room opposite. I could arrange a looking-glass, maybe, and if you were behind the door--
Standing as it does near the corner of the street, it commands a view down Howe Street, with its more pretentious houses.
Holmes pointed with a chuckle to one of these, a row of residential flats, which projected so that they could not fail to catch the eye.
"See, Watson!" said he. "'High red house with stone facings.' There is the signal station all right. We know the place, and we know the code; so surely our task should be simple.
There's a 'to let' card in that window. It is evidently an empty flat to which the confederate has access.
I have it all ready for you. If you will both come up and leave your boots below on the landing, I'll put you there now.
It was an excellent hiding-place which she had arranged. The mirror was so placed that, seated in the dark, we could very plainly see the door opposite.
We had hardly settled down in it, and Mrs. Warren left us, when a distant tinkle announced that our mysterious neighbour had rung.
Presently the landlady appeared with the tray, laid it down upon a chair beside the closed door, and then, treading heavily, departed.
An instant later it was hurriedly replaced, and I caught a glimpse of a dark, beautiful, horrified face glaring at the narrow opening of the box-room.
Then the door crashed to, the key turned once more, and all was silence. Holmes twitched my sleeve, and together we stole down the stair.
"I will call again in the evening," said he to the expectant landlady. "I think, Watson, we can discuss this business better in our own quarters."
"My surmise, as you saw, proved to be correct," said he, speaking from the depths of his easy-chair. "There has been a substitution of lodgers.
Well, she saw something to alarm her. That is certain. The general sequence of events is pretty clear, is it not?
A couple seek refuge in London from a very terrible and instant danger. The measure of that danger is the rigour of their precautions.
The man, who has some work which he must do, desires to leave the woman in absolute safety while he does it.
It is not an easy problem, but he solved it in an original fashion, and so effectively that her presence was not even known to the landlady who supplies her with food.
The printed messages, as is now evident, were to prevent her sex being discovered by her writing. The man cannot come near the woman, or he will guide their enemies to her.
Since he cannot communicate with her direct, he has recourse to the agony column of a paper. So far all is clear.
Ah, yes, Watson--severely practical, as usual! What is at the root of it all? Mrs. Warren's whimsical problem enlarges somewhat and assumes a more sinister aspect as we proceed.
This much we can say: that it is no ordinary love escapade. You saw the woman's face at the sign of danger.
We have heard, too, of the attack upon the landlord, which was undoubtedly meant for the lodger. These alarms, and the desperate need for secrecy, argue that the matter is one of life or death.
The attack upon Mr. Warren further shows that the enemy, whoever they are, are themselves not aware of the substitution of the female lodger for the male.
What, indeed? It is art for art's sake, Watson. I suppose when you doctored you found yourself studying cases without thought of a fee?
Education never ends, Watson. It is a series of lessons with the greatest for the last. This is an instructive case.
There is neither money nor credit in it, and yet one would wish to tidy it up. When dusk comes we should find ourselves one stage advanced in our investigation.
As we peered from the darkened sitting-room of the lodging-house, one more dim light glimmered high up through the obscurity.
"Someone is moving in that room," said Holmes in a whisper, his gaunt and eager face thrust forward to the window-pane.
Yes, I can see his shadow. There he is again! He has a candle in his hand. Now he is peering across.
He wants to be sure that she is on the lookout. Now he begins to flash. Take the message also, Watson, that we may check each other.
A single flash--that is A, surely. Now, then. How many did you make it? Twenty. So did I. That should mean T. AT--that's intelligible enough.
Another T. Surely this is the beginning of a second word. Now, then--TENTA. Dead stop. That can't be all, Watson?
ATTENTA gives no sense. Nor is it any better as three words AT, TEN, TA, unless T. A. are a person's initials.
There it goes again! What's that? ATTE--why, it is the same message over again. Curious, Watson, very curious.
Now he is off once more! AT--why he is repeating it for the third time. ATTENTA three times! How often will he repeat it?
Not a doubt of it. It is a very urgent message, thrice repeated to make it more so. But beware of what?
Again we saw the dim silhouette of a crouching man and the whisk of the small flame across the window as the signals were renewed.
PERICOLO--pericolo--eh, what's that, Watson? 'Danger,' isn't it? Yes, by Jove, it's a danger signal. There he goes again!
The light had suddenly gone out, the glimmering square of window had disappeared, and the third floor formed a dark band round the lofty building, with its tiers of shining casements.
That last warning cry had been suddenly cut short. How, and by whom? The same thought occurred on the instant to us both.
"This is serious, Watson," he cried. "There is some devilry going forward! Why should such a message stop in such a way?
I should put Scotland Yard in touch with this business--and yet, it is too pressing for us to leave.
We must define the situation a little more clearly. It may bear some more innocent interpretation. Come, Watson, let us go across ourselves and see what we can make of it.
At the doorway of the Howe Street flats a man, muffled in a cravat and greatcoat, was leaning against the railing.
"Why, Gregson!" said my companion as he shook hands with the Scotland Yard detective. "Journeys end with lovers' meetings.
Yes, from that window. They broke off in the middle. We came over to see the reason. But since it is safe in your hands I see no object in continuing this business.
"Wait a bit!" cried Gregson eagerly. "I'll do you this justice, Mr. Holmes, that I was never in a case yet that I didn't feel stronger for having you on my side.
"May I introduce you to Mr. Sherlock Holmes?" he said to the cabman. "This is Mr. Leverton, of Pinkerton's American Agency."
The American, a quiet, businesslike young man, with a clean-shaven, hatchet face, flushed up at the words of commendation.
Oh, he has a European fame, has he? Well, we've learned all about him in America. We KNOW he is at the bottom of fifty murders, and yet we have nothing positive we can take him on.
I tracked him over from New York, and I've been close to him for a week in London, waiting some excuse to get my hand on his collar.
Mr. Gregson and I ran him to ground in that big tenement house, and there's only one door, so he can't slip us.
"Mr. Holmes talks of signals," said Gregson. "I expect, as usual, he knows a good deal that we don't."
In a few clear words Holmes explained the situation as it had appeared to us. The American struck his hands together with vexation.
Well, it figures out that way, does it not? Here he is, sending out messages to an accomplice--there are several of his gang in London.
Then suddenly, just as by your own account he was telling them that there was danger, he broke short off.
"He is in unoccupied premises under suspicious circumstances," said Gregson. "That is good enough for the moment.
When we have him by the heels we can see if New York can't help us to keep him. I'll take the responsibility of arresting him now.
The Pinkerton man had tried to push past him, but Gregson had firmly elbowed him back. London dangers were the privilege of the London force.
The door of the left-hand flat upon the third landing was standing ajar. Gregson pushed it open. Within all was absolute silence and darkness.
I struck a match and lit the detective's lantern. As I did so, and as the flicker steadied into a flame, we all gave a gasp of surprise.
On the deal boards of the carpetless floor there was outlined a fresh track of blood. The red steps pointed towards us and led away from an inner room, the door of which was closed.
Gregson flung it open and held his light full blaze in front of him, while we all peered eagerly over his shoulders.
His knees were drawn up, his hands thrown out in agony, and from the centre of his broad, brown, upturned throat there projected the white haft of a knife driven blade-deep into his body.
Giant as he was, the man must have gone down like a pole-axed ox before that terrific blow. Beside his right hand a most formidable horn-handled, two-edged dagger lay upon the floor, and near it a black kid glove.
"By George! it's Black Gorgiano himself!" cried the American detective. "Someone has got ahead of us this time."
Holmes had stepped across, had lit the candle, and was passing it backward and forward across the window-panes.
"I rather think that will be helpful," said he. He came over and stood in deep thought while the two professionals were examining the body.
"You say that three people came out from the flat while you were waiting downstairs," said he at last.
That is your man, I fancy. I can give you his description, and we have a very excellent outline of his footmark.
We all turned round at the words. There, framed in the doorway, was a tall and beautiful woman--the mysterious lodger of Bloomsbury.
Slowly she advanced, her face pale and drawn with a frightful apprehension, her eyes fixed and staring, her terrified gaze riveted upon the dark figure on the floor.
"You have killed him!" she muttered. "Oh, Dio mio, you have killed him!" Then I heard a sudden sharp intake of her breath, and she sprang into the air with a cry of joy.
Round and round the room she danced, her hands clapping, her dark eyes gleaming with delighted wonder, and a thousand pretty Italian exclamations pouring from her lips.
It was terrible and amazing to see such a woman so convulsed with joy at such a sight. Suddenly she stopped and gazed at us all with a questioning stare.
"But where, then, is Gennaro?" she asked. "He is my husband, Gennaro Lucca. I am Emilia Lucca, and we are both from New York.
Your cipher was not difficult, madam. Your presence here was desirable. I knew that I had only to flash 'Vieni' and you would surely come.
"I do not understand how you know these things," she said. "Giuseppe Gorgiano--how did he--" She paused, and then suddenly her face lit up with pride and delight.
Now I see it! My Gennaro! My splendid, beautiful Gennaro, who has guarded me safe from all harm, he did it, with his own strong hand he killed the monster!
"Well, Mrs. Lucca," said the prosaic Gregson, laying his hand upon the lady's sleeve with as little sentiment as if she were a Notting Hill hooligan, "I am not very clear yet who you are or what you are; but you've said enough to make it very clear that we shall want you at the Yard."
"One moment, Gregson," said Holmes. "I rather fancy that this lady may be as anxious to give us information as we can be to get it.
You understand, madam, that your husband will be arrested and tried for the death of the man who lies before us?
What you say may be used in evidence. But if you think that he has acted from motives which are not criminal, and which he would wish to have known, then you cannot serve him better than by telling us the whole story.
"Now that Gorgiano is dead we fear nothing," said the lady. "He was a devil and a monster, and there can be no judge in the world who would punish my husband for having killed him."
"In that case," said Holmes, "my suggestion is that we lock this door, leave things as we found them, go with this lady to her room, and form our opinion after we have heard what it is that she has to say to us."
Half an hour later we were seated, all four, in the small sitting-room of Signora Lucca, listening to her remarkable narrative of those sinister events, the ending of which we had chanced to witness.
She spoke in rapid and fluent but very unconventional English, which, for the sake of clearness, I will make grammatical.
The rest, gentlemen, you know for yourselves. We were sure that our enemies would be behind us like our own shadows.
Gorgiano had his private reasons for vengeance, but in any case we knew how ruthless, cunning, and untiring he could be.
Both Italy and America are full of stories of his dreadful powers. If ever they were exerted it would be now.
My darling made use of the few clear days which our start had given us in arranging for a refuge for me in such a fashion that no possible danger could reach me.
For his own part, he wished to be free that he might communicate both with the American and with the Italian police.
I do not myself know where he lived, or how. All that I learned was through the columns of a newspaper.
But once as I looked through my window, I saw two Italians watching the house, and I understood that in some way Gorgiano had found our retreat.
Finally Gennaro told me, through the paper, that he would signal to me from a certain window, but when the signals came they were nothing but warnings, which were suddenly interrupted.
It is very clear to me now that he knew Gorgiano to be close upon him, and that, thank God! he was ready for him when he came.
And now, gentleman, I would ask you whether we have anything to fear from the law, or whether any judge upon earth would condemn my Gennaro for what he has done?
"Well, Mr. Gregson," said the American, looking across at the official, "I don't know what your British point of view may be, but I guess that in New York this lady's husband will receive a pretty general vote of thanks."
"She will have to come with me and see the chief," Gregson answered. "If what she says is corroborated, I do not think she or her husband has much to fear.
But what I can't make head or tail of, Mr. Holmes, is how on earth YOU got yourself mixed up in the matter.
Education, Gregson, education. Still seeking knowledge at the old university. Well, Watson, you have one more specimen of the tragic and grotesque to add to your collection.
By the way, it is not eight o'clock, and a Wagner night at Covent Garden! If we hurry, we might be in time for the second act.
It was indeed this attitude upon the part of my friend and certainly not any lack of interesting material which has caused me of late years to lay very few of my records before the public.
My participation in some of his adventures was always a privilege which entailed discretion and reticence upon me.
It was, then, with considerable surprise that I received a telegram from Holmes last Tuesday--he has never been known to write where a telegram would serve--in the following terms:
I have no idea what backward sweep of memory had brought the matter fresh to his mind, or what freak had caused him to desire that I should recount it; but I hasten, before another cancelling telegram may arrive, to hunt out the notes which give me the exact details of the case and to lay the narrative before my readers.
Thus it was that in the early spring of that year we found ourselves together in a small cottage near Poldhu Bay, at the further extremity of the Cornish peninsula.
With a northerly breeze it lies placid and sheltered, inviting the storm-tossed craft to tack into it for rest and protection.
Then come the sudden swirl round of the wind, the blistering gale from the south-west, the dragging anchor, the lee shore, and the last battle in the creaming breakers.
On the land side our surroundings were as sombre as on the sea. It was a country of rolling moors, lonely and dun-colored, with an occasional church tower to mark the site of some old-world village.
Many of my readers may retain some recollection of what was called at the time "The Cornish Horror," though a most imperfect account of the matter reached the London press.
The vicar of the parish, Mr. Roundhay, was something of an archaeologist, and as such Holmes had made his acquaintance.
I remember that during our short visit we found the vicar garrulous, but his lodger strangely reticent, a sad-faced, introspective man, sitting with averted eyes, brooding apparently upon his own affairs.
These were the two men who entered abruptly into our little sitting-room on Tuesday, March the 16th, shortly after our breakfast hour, as we were smoking together, preparatory to our daily excursion upon the moors.
"Mr. Holmes," said the vicar in an agitated voice, "the most extraordinary and tragic affair has occurred during the night.
It is the most unheard-of business. We can only regard it as a special Providence that you should chance to be here at the time, for in all England you are the one man we need.
I glared at the intrusive vicar with no very friendly eyes; but Holmes took his pipe from his lips and sat up in his chair like an old hound who hears the view-halloa.
He waved his hand to the sofa, and our palpitating visitor with his agitated companion sat side by side upon it.
Mr. Mortimer Tregennis was more self-contained than the clergyman, but the twitching of his thin hands and the brightness of his dark eyes showed that they shared a common emotion.
"Well, as you seem to have made the discovery, whatever it may be, and the vicar to have had it second-hand, perhaps you had better do the speaking," said Holmes.
I glanced at the hastily clad clergyman, with the formally dressed lodger seated beside him, and was amused at the surprise which Holmes's simple deduction had brought to their faces.
He left them shortly after ten o'clock, playing cards round the dining-room table, in excellent health and spirits.
Mr. Mortimer Tregennis naturally went with him. When he arrived at Tredannick Wartha he found an extraordinary state of things.
His two brothers and his sister were seated round the table exactly as he had left them, the cards still spread in front of them and the candles burned down to their sockets.
The sister lay back stone-dead in her chair, while the two brothers sat on each side of her laughing, shouting, and singing, the senses stricken clean out of them.
All three of them, the dead woman and the two demented men, retained upon their faces an expression of the utmost horror--a convulsion of terror which was dreadful to look upon.
There was no sign of the presence of anyone in the house, except Mrs. Porter, the old cook and housekeeper, who declared that she had slept deeply and heard no sound during the night.
Nothing had been stolen or disarranged, and there is absolutely no explanation of what the horror can be which has frightened a woman to death and two strong men out of their senses.
There is the situation, Mr. Holmes, in a nutshell, and if you can help us to clear it up you will have done a great work.
He sat for some little time in silence, absorbed in the strange drama which had broken in upon our peace.
"I will look into this matter," he said at last. "On the face of it, it would appear to be a case of a very exceptional nature.
No, Mr. Holmes. Mr. Tregennis brought back the account to the vicarage, and I at once hurried over with him to consult you.
Then we shall walk over together. But before we start I must ask you a few questions, Mr. Mortimer Tregennis.
The other had been silent all this time, but I had observed that his more controlled excitement was even greater than the obtrusive emotion of the clergyman.
He sat with a pale, drawn face, his anxious gaze fixed upon Holmes, and his thin hands clasped convulsively together.
His pale lips quivered as he listened to the dreadful experience which had befallen his family, and his dark eyes seemed to reflect something of the horror of the scene.
"Ask what you like, Mr. Holmes," said he eagerly. "It is a bad thing to speak of, but I will answer you the truth."
Well, Mr. Holmes, I supped there, as the vicar has said, and my elder brother George proposed a game of whist afterwards.
We sat down about nine o'clock. It was a quarter-past ten when I moved to go. I left them all round the table, as merry as could be.
Mrs. Porter had gone to bed, so I let myself out. I shut the hall door behind me. The window of the room in which they sat was closed, but the blind was not drawn down.
There was no change in door or window this morning, or any reason to think that any stranger had been to the house.
Yet there they sat, driven clean mad with terror, and Brenda lying dead of fright, with her head hanging over the arm of the chair.
"The facts, as you state them, are certainly most remarkable," said Holmes. "I take it that you have no theory yourself which can in any way account for them?"
"It's devilish, Mr. Holmes, devilish!" cried Mortimer Tregennis. "It is not of this world. Something has come into that room which has dashed the light of reason from their minds.
"I fear," said Holmes, "that if the matter is beyond humanity it is certainly beyond me. Yet we must exhaust all natural explanations before we fall back upon such a theory as this.
As to yourself, Mr. Tregennis, I take it you were divided in some way from your family, since they lived together and you had rooms apart?
That is so, Mr. Holmes, though the matter is past and done with. We were a family of tin-miners at Redruth, but we sold our venture to a company, and so retired with enough to keep us.
I won't deny that there was some feeling about the division of the money and it stood between us for a time, but it was all forgiven and forgotten, and we were the best of friends together.
Looking back at the evening which you spent together, does anything stand out in your memory as throwing any possible light upon the tragedy?
"There is one thing occurs to me," said he at last. "As we sat at the table my back was to the window, and my brother George, he being my partner at cards, was facing it.
I couldn't even say if it was man or animal, but I just thought there was something there. When I asked him what he was looking at, he told me that he had the same feeling.
I am an early riser and generally take a walk before breakfast. This morning I had hardly started when the doctor in his carriage overtook me.
He told me that old Mrs. Porter had sent a boy down with an urgent message. I sprang in beside him and we drove on.
When we got there we looked into that dreadful room. The candles and the fire must have burned out hours before, and they had been sitting there in the dark until dawn had broken.
The doctor said Brenda must have been dead at least six hours. There were no signs of violence. She just lay across the arm of the chair with that look on her face.
George and Owen were singing snatches of songs and gibbering like two great apes. Oh, it was awful to see!
I couldn't stand it, and the doctor was as white as a sheet. Indeed, he fell into a chair in a sort of faint, and we nearly had him on our hands as well.
"Remarkable--most remarkable!" said Holmes, rising and taking his hat. "I think, perhaps, we had better go down to Tredannick Wartha without further delay.
Our proceedings of that first morning did little to advance the investigation. It was marked, however, at the outset by an incident which left the most sinister impression upon my mind.
As it drove by us I caught a glimpse through the closed window of a horribly contorted, grinning face glaring out at us.
We looked with horror after the black carriage, lumbering upon its way. Then we turned our steps towards this ill-omened house in which they had met their strange fate.
It was a large and bright dwelling, rather a villa than a cottage, with a considerable garden which was already, in that Cornish air, well filled with spring flowers.
Holmes walked slowly and thoughtfully among the flower-plots and along the path before we entered the porch.
So absorbed was he in his thoughts, I remember, that he stumbled over the watering-pot, upset its contents, and deluged both our feet and the garden path.
Inside the house we were met by the elderly Cornish housekeeper, Mrs. Porter, who, with the aid of a young girl, looked after the wants of the family.
She readily answered all Holmes's questions. She had heard nothing in the night. Her employers had all been in excellent spirits lately, and she had never known them more cheerful and prosperous.
She had fainted with horror upon entering the room in the morning and seeing that dreadful company round the table.
She had, when she recovered, thrown open the window to let the morning air in, and had run down to the lane, whence she sent a farm-lad for the doctor.
The lady was on her bed upstairs if we cared to see her. It took four strong men to get the brothers into the asylum carriage.
She would not herself stay in the house another day and was starting that very afternoon to rejoin her family at St. Ives.
We ascended the stairs and viewed the body. Miss Brenda Tregennis had been a very beautiful girl, though now verging upon middle age.
Her dark, clear-cut face was handsome, even in death, but there still lingered upon it something of that convulsion of horror which had been her last human emotion.
From her bedroom we descended to the sitting-room, where this strange tragedy had actually occurred. The charred ashes of the overnight fire lay in the grate.
On the table were the four guttered and burned-out candles, with the cards scattered over its surface.
He tested how much of the garden was visible; he examined the floor, the ceiling, and the fireplace; but never once did I see that sudden brightening of his eyes and tightening of his lips which would have told me that he saw some gleam of light in this utter darkness.
Mortimer Tregennis explained that the night was cold and damp. For that reason, after his arrival, the fire was lit.
My friend smiled and laid his hand upon my arm. "I think, Watson, that I shall resume that course of tobacco-poisoning which you have so often and so justly condemned," said he.
With your permission, gentlemen, we will now return to our cottage, for I am not aware that any new factor is likely to come to our notice here.
I will turn the facts over in my mind, Mr. Tregennis, and should anything occur to me I will certainly communicate with you and the vicar.
It was not until long after we were back in Poldhu Cottage that Holmes broke his complete and absorbed silence.
He sat coiled in his armchair, his haggard and ascetic face hardly visible amid the blue swirl of his tobacco smoke, his black brows drawn down, his forehead contracted, his eyes vacant and far away.
If, then, Mortimer Tregennis disappeared from the scene, and yet some outside person affected the card-players, how can we reconstruct that person, and how was such an impression of horror conveyed?
The only suggestion in this direction comes from Mortimer Tregennis himself, who says that his brother spoke about some movement in the garden.
Meanwhile, we shall put the case aside until more accurate data are available, and devote the rest of our morning to the pursuit of neolithic man.
It was not until we had returned in the afternoon to our cottage that we found a visitor awaiting us, who soon brought our minds back to the matter in hand.
Neither of us needed to be told who that visitor was. The huge body, the craggy and deeply seamed face with the fierce eyes and hawk-like nose, the grizzled hair which nearly brushed our cottage ceiling, the beard--golden at the fringes and white near the lips, save for the nicotine stain from his perpetual cigar--all these were as well known in London as in Africa, and could only be associated with the tremendous personality of Dr. Leon Sterndale, the great lion-hunter and explorer.
We had heard of his presence in the district and had once or twice caught sight of his tall figure upon the moorland paths.
Here, amid his books and his maps, he lived an absolutely lonely life, attending to his own simple wants and paying little apparent heed to the affairs of his neighbours.
It was a surprise to me, therefore, to hear him asking Holmes in an eager voice whether he had made any advance in his reconstruction of this mysterious episode.
"The county police are utterly at fault," said he, "but perhaps your wider experience has suggested some conceivable explanation.
I may tell you that I had got as far as Plymouth upon my way to Africa, but the news reached me this morning, and I came straight back again to help in the inquiry.
"I have no objection to telling you," he said. "It was Mr. Roundhay, the vicar, who sent me the telegram which recalled me."
"Thank you," said Holmes. "I may say in answer to your original question that I have not cleared my mind entirely on the subject of this case, but that I have every hope of reaching some conclusion.
"Then I have wasted my time and need not prolong my visit." The famous doctor strode out of our cottage in considerable ill-humour, and within five minutes Holmes had followed him.
I saw him no more until the evening, when he returned with a slow step and haggard face which assured me that he had made no great progress with his investigation.
"From the Plymouth hotel, Watson," he said. "I learned the name of it from the vicar, and I wired to make certain that Dr. Leon Sterndale's account was true.
It appears that he did indeed spend last night there, and that he has actually allowed some of his baggage to go on to Africa, while he returned to be present at this investigation.
Deeply interested--yes. There is a thread here which we had not yet grasped and which might lead us through the tangle.
Cheer up, Watson, for I am very sure that our material has not yet all come to hand. When it does we may soon leave our difficulties behind us.
Little did I think how soon the words of Holmes would be realized, or how strange and sinister would be that new development which opened up an entirely fresh line of investigation.
I was shaving at my window in the morning when I heard the rattle of hoofs and, looking up, saw a dog-cart coming at a gallop down the road.
It pulled up at our door, and our friend, the vicar, sprang from it and rushed up our garden path. Holmes was already dressed, and we hastened down to meet him.
Our visitor was so excited that he could hardly articulate, but at last in gasps and bursts his tragic story came out of him.
"We are devil-ridden, Mr. Holmes! My poor parish is devil-ridden!" he cried. "Satan himself is loose in it!
We are given over into his hands!" He danced about in his agitation, a ludicrous object if it were not for his ashy face and startled eyes.
Mr. Mortimer Tregennis died during the night, and with exactly the same symptoms as the rest of his family.
Then, Watson, we will postpone our breakfast. Mr. Roundhay, we are entirely at your disposal. Hurry--hurry, before things get disarranged.
The lodger occupied two rooms at the vicarage, which were in an angle by themselves, the one above the other.
Below was a large sitting-room; above, his bedroom. They looked out upon a croquet lawn which came up to the windows.
We had arrived before the doctor or the police, so that everything was absolutely undisturbed. Let me describe exactly the scene as we saw it upon that misty March morning.
The atmosphere of the room was of a horrible and depressing stuffiness. The servant who had first entered had thrown up the window, or it would have been even more intolerable.
His limbs were convulsed and his fingers contorted as though he had died in a very paroxysm of fear. He was fully clothed, though there were signs that his dressing had been done in a hurry.
We had already learned that his bed had been slept in, and that the tragic end had come to him in the early morning.
One realized the red-hot energy which underlay Holmes's phlegmatic exterior when one saw the sudden change which came over him from the moment that he entered the fatal apartment.
In an instant he was tense and alert, his eyes shining, his face set, his limbs quivering with eager activity.
He was out on the lawn, in through the window, round the room, and up into the bedroom, for all the world like a dashing foxhound drawing a cover.
The lamp, which was an ordinary standard, he examined with minute care, making certain measurements upon its bowl.
Finally, just as the doctor and the official police put in an appearance, he beckoned to the vicar and we all three went out upon the lawn.
Each is suggestive, and together they are almost conclusive. If the police would desire further information I shall be happy to see any of them at the cottage.
This he filled with the same oil as that used at the vicarage, and he carefully timed the period which it would take to be exhausted.
Another experiment which he made was of a more unpleasant nature, and one which I am not likely ever to forget.
"You will remember, Watson," he remarked one afternoon, "that there is a single common point of resemblance in the varying reports which have reached us.
This concerns the effect of the atmosphere of the room in each case upon those who had first entered it.
You will recollect that Mortimer Tregennis, in describing the episode of his last visit to his brother's house, remarked that the doctor on entering the room fell into a chair?
In the second case--that of Mortimer Tregennis himself--you cannot have forgotten the horrible stuffiness of the room when we arrived, though the servant had thrown open the window.
That servant, I found upon inquiry, was so ill that she had gone to her bed. You will admit, Watson, that these facts are very suggestive.
In each case there is evidence of a poisonous atmosphere. In each case, also, there is combustion going on in the room--in the one case a fire, in the other a lamp.
The fire was needed, but the lamp was lit--as a comparison of the oil consumed will show--long after it was broad daylight.
Why? Surely because there is some connection between three things--the burning, the stuffy atmosphere, and, finally, the madness or death of those unfortunate people.
With this train of reasoning in my head I naturally looked about in Mortimer Tregennis's room to find some remains of this substance.
It is not for me, my dear Watson, to stand in the way of the official police force. I leave them all the evidence which I found.
Oh, you will see it out, will you? I thought I knew my Watson. This chair I will place opposite yours, so that we may be the same distance from the poison and face to face.
The door we will leave ajar. Each is now in a position to watch the other and to bring the experiment to an end should the symptoms seem alarming.
Is that all clear? Well, then, I take our powder--or what remains of it--from the envelope, and I lay it above the burning lamp.
They were not long in coming. I had hardly settled in my chair before I was conscious of a thick, musky odour, subtle and nauseous.
A freezing horror took possession of me. I felt that my hair was rising, that my eyes were protruding, that my mouth was opened, and my tongue like leather.
The turmoil within my brain was such that something must surely snap. I tried to scream and was vaguely aware of some hoarse croak which was my own voice, but distant and detached from myself.
Slowly it rose from our souls like the mists from a landscape until peace and reason had returned, and we were sitting upon the grass, wiping our clammy foreheads, and looking with apprehension at each other to mark the last traces of that terrific experience which we had undergone.
"Upon my word, Watson!" said Holmes at last with an unsteady voice, "I owe you both my thanks and an apology.
It was an unjustifiable experiment even for one's self, and doubly so for a friend. I am really very sorry.
"You know," I answered with some emotion, for I have never seen so much of Holmes's heart before, "that it is my greatest joy and privilege to help you."
He relapsed at once into the half-humorous, half-cynical vein which was his habitual attitude to those about him.
"It would be superfluous to drive us mad, my dear Watson," said he. "A candid observer would certainly declare that we were so already before we embarked upon so wild an experiment.
We must give the room a little time to clear. I take it, Watson, that you have no longer a shadow of a doubt as to how these tragedies were produced?
But the cause remains as obscure as before. Come into the arbour here and let us discuss it together.
We must remember, in the first place, that there is some story of a family quarrel, followed by a reconciliation.
Well, in the next place, you will remember that this idea of someone moving in the garden, which took our attention for a moment from the real cause of the tragedy, emanated from him.
He had a motive in misleading us. Finally, if he did not throw the substance into the fire at the moment of leaving the room, who did do so?
The affair happened immediately after his departure. Had anyone else come in, the family would certainly have risen from the table.
Besides, in peaceful Cornwall, visitors did not arrive after ten o'clock at night. We may take it, then, that all the evidence points to Mortimer Tregennis as the culprit.
Ah! he is a little before his time. Perhaps you would kindly step this way, Dr. Leon Sterndale. We have been conducing a chemical experiment indoors which has left our little room hardly fit for the reception of so distinguished a visitor.
I had heard the click of the garden gate, and now the majestic figure of the great African explorer appeared upon the path.
You sent for me, Mr. Holmes. I had your note about an hour ago, and I have come, though I really do not know why I should obey your summons.
"Perhaps we can clear the point up before we separate," said Holmes. "Meanwhile, I am much obliged to you for your courteous acquiescence.
Perhaps, since the matters which we have to discuss will affect you personally in a very intimate fashion, it is as well that we should talk where there can be no eavesdropping.
"I am at a loss to know, sir," he said, "what you can have to speak about which affects me personally in a very intimate fashion."
Then he stopped, and with a violent effort he resumed a cold, rigid calmness, which was, perhaps, more suggestive of danger than his hot-headed outburst.
"I have lived so long among savages and beyond the law," said he, "that I have got into the way of being a law to myself.
Nor have I any desire to do you an injury, Dr. Sterndale. Surely the clearest proof of it is that, knowing what I know, I have sent for you and not for the police.
Sterndale sat down with a gasp, overawed for, perhaps, the first time in his adventurous life. There was a calm assurance of power in Holmes's manner which could not be withstood.
"What do you mean?" he asked at last. "If this is bluff upon your part, Mr. Holmes, you have chosen a bad man for your experiment.
"I will tell you," said Holmes, "and the reason why I tell you is that I hope frankness may beget frankness.
Sterndale mopped his forehead with his handkerchief. "Upon my word, you are getting on," said he. "Do all your successes depend upon this prodigious power of bluff?"
"The bluff," said Holmes sternly, "is upon your side, Dr. Leon Sterndale, and not upon mine. As a proof I will tell you some of the facts upon which my conclusions are based.
Of your return from Plymouth, allowing much of your property to go on to Africa, I will say nothing save that it first informed me that you were one of the factors which had to be taken into account in reconstructing this drama--
I have heard your reasons and regard them as unconvincing and inadequate. We will pass that. You came down here to ask me whom I suspected.
I refused to answer you. You then went to the vicarage, waited outside it for some time, and finally returned to your cottage.
That is what you may expect to see when I follow you. You spent a restless night at your cottage, and you formed certain plans, which in the early morning you proceeded to put into execution.
Leaving your door just as day was breaking, you filled your pocket with some reddish gravel that was lying heaped beside your gate.
You then walked swiftly for the mile which separated you from the vicarage. You were wearing, I may remark, the same pair of ribbed tennis shoes which are at the present moment upon your feet.
At the vicarage you passed through the orchard and the side hedge, coming out under the window of the lodger Tregennis.
It was now daylight, but the household was not yet stirring. You drew some of the gravel from your pocket, and you threw it up at the window above you.
Holmes smiled at the compliment. "It took two, or possibly three, handfuls before the lodger came to the window.
You beckoned him to come down. He dressed hurriedly and descended to his sitting-room. You entered by the window.
There was an interview--a short one--during which you walked up and down the room. Then you passed out and closed the window, standing on the lawn outside smoking a cigar and watching what occurred.
Finally, after the death of Tregennis, you withdrew as you had come. Now, Dr. Sterndale, how do you justify such conduct, and what were the motives for your actions?
If you prevaricate or trifle with me, I give you my assurance that the matter will pass out of my hands forever.
Our visitor's face had turned ashen gray as he listened to the words of his accuser. Now he sat for some time in thought with his face sunk in his hands.
Then with a sudden impulsive gesture he plucked a photograph from his breast-pocket and threw it on the rustic table before us.
"Yes, Brenda Tregennis," repeated our visitor. "For years I have loved her. For years she has loved me.
There is the secret of that Cornish seclusion which people have marvelled at. It has brought me close to the one thing on earth that was dear to me.
I could not marry her, for I have a wife who has left me for years and yet whom, by the deplorable laws of England, I could not divorce.
For years Brenda waited. For years I waited. And this is what we have waited for." A terrible sob shook his great frame, and he clutched his throat under his brindled beard.
The vicar knew. He was in our confidence. He would tell you that she was an angel upon earth. That was why he telegraphed to me and I returned.
What was my baggage or Africa to me when I learned that such a fate had come upon my darling? There you have the missing clue to my action, Mr. Holmes.
Dr. Sterndale drew from his pocket a paper packet and laid it upon the table. On the outside was written "Radix pedis diaboli" with a red poison label beneath it.
He pushed it towards me. "I understand that you are a doctor, sir. Have you ever heard of this preparation?"
"It is no reflection upon your professional knowledge," said he, "for I believe that, save for one sample in a laboratory at Buda, there is no other specimen in Europe.
It is used as an ordeal poison by the medicine-men in certain districts of West Africa and is kept as a secret among them.
This particular specimen I obtained under very extraordinary circumstances in the Ubangi country." He opened the paper as he spoke and disclosed a heap of reddish-brown, snuff-like powder.
Now I have told you all. You have yourself supplied the rest. I did, as you say, after a restless night, set off early from my cottage.
I foresaw the difficulty of arousing him, so I gathered some gravel from the pile which you have mentioned, and I used it to throw up to his window.
He came down and admitted me through the window of the sitting-room. I laid his offence before him. I told him that I had come both as judge and executioner.
In five minutes he died. My God! how he died! But my heart was flint, for he endured nothing which my innocent darling had not felt before him.
There is my story, Mr. Holmes. Perhaps, if you loved a woman, you would have done as much yourself. At any rate, I am in your hands.
You can take what steps you like. As I have already said, there is no man living who can fear death less than I do.
Dr. Sterndale raised his giant figure, bowed gravely, and walked from the arbour. Holmes lit his pipe and handed me his pouch.
"Some fumes which are not poisonous would be a welcome change," said he. "I think you must agree, Watson, that it is not a case in which we are called upon to interfere.
Our investigation has been independent, and our action shall be so also. You would not denounce the man?
I have never loved, Watson, but if I did and if the woman I loved had met such an end, I might act even as our lawless lion-hunter has done.
Who knows? Well, Watson, I will not offend your intelligence by explaining what is obvious. The gravel upon the window-sill was, of course, the starting-point of my research.
It was unlike anything in the vicarage garden. Only when my attention had been drawn to Dr. Sterndale and his cottage did I find its counterpart.
The lamp shining in broad daylight and the remains of powder upon the shield were successive links in a fairly obvious chain.
And now, my dear Watson, I think we may dismiss the matter from our mind and go back with a clear conscience to the study of those Chaldean roots which are surely to be traced in the Cornish branch of the great Celtic speech.